---
title: "2026 United States intervention in Venezuela (part 1/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2026_United_States_intervention_in_Venezuela
domain: 2026-united-states-intervention-in-venezuela
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 2026 united states intervention in venezuela
fetched: 2026-07-04
part: 1/3
---

# 2026 United States intervention in Venezuela

On 3 January 2026, the United States launched a military strike in Venezuela and captured incumbent Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro and his wife, Cilia Flores. The US operation, codenamed **Operation Absolute Resolve**, began around 2 a.m. local time, when explosions were observed. The US Armed Forces bombed infrastructure across northern Venezuela to suppress air defenses as an apprehension force attacked Maduro's compound in Caracas. Maduro and Flores were transported to New York City by US forces to face their trial for drug trafficking there. The operation is sometimes considered a military conflict because seven US soldiers were injured. At 2 hours and 28 minutes, it qualifies as one of the shortest wars in history.

The US federal government announced that Maduro and Flores had been indicted on several charges related to narcoterrorism. Maduro and Flores pleaded not guilty to the charges in Manhattan federal court on 5 January 2026. US president Donald Trump and his administration justified the operation as a law-enforcement action, with military support, that the president has "inherent constitutional authority" to undertake.

Venezuelan vice president Delcy Rodríguez denounced Maduro's "kidnapping". Venezuelan officials said at least 23 Venezuelan security officers were killed during the attack. The Cuban government said that 32 members of the Cuban military and intelligence agencies were killed. Officials in the United Nations (UN), the US, and other countries, as well as international law experts said the raid violated the UN Charter and Venezuela's sovereignty.. Other reactions around the world included celebrations by the Venezuelan diaspora and protests against the attack.

The Venezuelan government remained in place, with Rodríguez sworn in as acting president on 5 January 2026. Multiple political prisoners (including foreigners) detained in Venezuela were released, a gesture which, according to Trump, contributed to avoiding a second wave of attacks. On 30 January, Rodríguez announced an amnesty bill for political prisoners covering the period of 1999 to present, which was approved on 19 February. As of 8 March, the number of political prisoners released confirmed since 8 January was 621 out of an estimate of over 800 held before January, according to human rights organizations. By February, the US and Venezuela had already restarted diplomatic relations, with the Embassy of the United States, Caracas, being reopened for the first time since its closure in 2019.

Trump and his administration made clear that access to Venezuelan oil was a core reason for the action. The US announced a 50-million-barrel oil supply deal with the remaining government in Venezuela, with the first $300 million already received on 20 January. On 29 January, a new law was passed by Rodríguez to give private companies control over the production and sale of oil. In parallel, the US lifted sanctions imposed on Venezuelan oil trade and issued licenses for companies to trade Venezuelan oil. According to US secretary of energy Chris Wright, who visited Venezuela in February, sales of Venezuelan oil have already reached over $1 billion since Maduro's capture and about $5 billion are expected in the upcoming months.

In May 2026, the interim Venezuelan authorities also collaborated in the capture and deportation to the United States of Alex Saab, a close ally of Maduro who was previously pardoned by previous US president Joe Biden during a prisoner exchange and in request for democratic presidential elections in Venezuela in 2024. In June 2026, Niño Guerrero, leader of the Venezuelan criminal organization Tren de Aragua, was killed in a joint operation between Venezuela and the United States.


## Background

### Political, economic and international

Nicolás Maduro has been criticized for authoritarian rule since Hugo Chávez hand-picked him as the next president of Venezuela in 2013. According to Reuters, "Maduro ruled Venezuela with a heavy hand ... presiding over deep economic and social crises and resisting pressure from domestic opponents and foreign governments for political change", and was "long accused by critics both at home and abroad of being a dictator who jailed or persecuted political opponents and repeatedly staged sham elections". Mark Weisbrot states that Venezuela has faced an economic crisis since the oil glut of the 2010s, due to its export-dependent economy.

For years, the US government pressured Maduro, considering him an "illegitimate leader". Maduro's victory in the 2018 Venezuelan presidential election was disputed and 45 countries did not accept the results, causing a presidential crisis that divided the international community from 2019 to 2023. Absent any vote tallies, Maduro was declared the winner of the 2024 Venezuelan presidential election by the government-controlled National Electoral Council; the result was "widely condemned as fraudulent by international observers and the opposition" who found statistical improbabilities in the results. The opposition showed evidence and vote tallies that its candidate, Edmundo González, had won a majority, matching the results of pre-election opinion polls, who was "widely believed to have won [the] election, and by a landslide", according to *The New York Times*. The Venezuelan government issued an arrest warrant for González, who left the country and was granted asylum in Spain. In January 2025, the Biden administration recognized González as Venezuela's legitimate president-elect. The Trump administration had sought to prosecute Maduro on narco-terrorism charges since at least 2020. At a 2023 press conference, Trump said, "Venezuela was about to collapse. We would have taken over it ... [and] kept all that oil."

Cilia Flores is a Venezuelan lawyer and politician who rose to power after she represented Chávez, who was imprisoned following the 1992 coup attempt; Flores helped secure his release in 1994. She was an influential part of Chavez's movement, Chavismo, although known for keeping a low public profile. In 2000, one year after Chavez became president of Venezuela, Flores was voted into the National Assembly. After becoming president of the National Assembly in 2006, she banned journalists from the legislative chamber, and was criticized for appointing dozens of relatives to public positions in Venezuela. She was the Attorney General of Venezuela from 2012 to 2013. Having known each other since the 1990s, Flores and Maduro married in 2013 following his succession of Chávez as president. Maduro, rather than describing her as the First Lady, has used the term "*primera combatiente*" or "First Combatant" of the revolution. US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) officers arrested two of her nephews in a Haitian sting operation in 2015, and they were sentenced on drug conspiracy charges but released in a 2022 prisoner swap with the Biden administration that included the Citgo Six. Flores has been sanctioned or the subject of travel bans by the United States, Canada, Panama, and Colombia for allegations of corruption and undermining democracy.

### Oil and mineral resources

Venezuela holds the world's largest proven oil reserves, estimated at 17% of the global total, or 300 billion barrels. In December 2025, the US began a maritime blockade of sanctioned oil or shadow fleet tankers.

The 2025–2026 operations are seen by the Trump administration as serving the triple goals of crippling Maduro, disrupting drug trade routes, and getting access to Venezuelan oil; Trump stated that revenue generated would go to the Venezuelan people, US oil companies, and "to the United States of America in the form of reimbursement for the damages caused us by that country". Following the raid, Trump's press conference made clear that oil was a motivation for action in Venezuela. Citing the restructuring of Venezuela's oil industry in 1976 and 2007, Trump, Stephen Miller, and others claimed that Venezuela had stolen oil from US companies. Trump suggested on 5 January that seized oil could be treated as a US asset, asserting the willingness to sell it or add it to the US Strategic Petroleum Reserve. On 9 January, after other sanctioned vessels were seized, and a tanker was returned to Venezuela as part of a joint operation between interim authorities in Venezuela and the US, Trump said: "This tanker is now on its way back to Venezuela, and the oil will be sold through the GREAT Energy Deal, which we have created for such sales."

The Trump administration also expressed interest in Venezuela's large deposits of gold and rare earth minerals. Some experts noted that the Maduro government had previously attempted to offer the US access to these minerals in a failed attempt to stave off military action, with the ongoing operations marking a return to "resource imperialism".

Trump stated on the day of the military operation that US oil companies would invest billions to increase oil production in the country; ExxonMobil, ConocoPhillips, and Chevron Corporation (the US oil majors) reportedly had no prior knowledge of the operation to remove Maduro and unnamed sources said they had no discussions with the Trump administration before the operation about investing in the country if Maduro was removed. Trump further stated that US oil companies would invest $100 billion in Venezuelan oil production; in a meeting between Trump and two dozen oil company executives on 9 January, ExxonMobil CEO Darren Woods stated that Venezuela was "uninvestable" due to the legal framework in the country while the majority of the executives in attendance did not make firm investment commitments. ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips left Venezuela after their assets were expropriated in 2007, while Chevron continued its operations. Two days after the meeting, Trump told reporters that he was "inclined" to keep ExxonMobil out of Venezuela because he "didn't like Exxon's response" to his proposed investments for the country and thought that "They're playing too cute."

Unlike Congress, Trump claimed to have spoken with oil companies both "before and after".

### Indictment of Maduro

The United States accused Maduro of electoral fraud and presiding over a "narco-state". In March 2020, during Trump's first term, the United States Justice Department indicted Maduro on cocaine-trafficking conspiracy charges, which Maduro denied. Trump designated two Venezuelan drug gangs, the Tren de Aragua and the Cartel of the Suns, as Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs) in January and July 2025 respectively, and alleged that the latter was led by Maduro. Maduro denied being involved in cartel leadership and characterized the designations as an attempt to use the war on drugs for regime change. Some Latin American crime experts have described the Cartel of the Suns as more of a general network of Venezuelan government and military corruption than as an organized group. Also in July 2025, a secret order instructed the US military to use force against cartels listed as terrorist organizations. In August 2025, the reward for Maduro's arrest increased to $50 million with US attorney general Pam Bondi calling Maduro "one of the largest narco-traffickers in the world and a threat to our national security."

However, the Associated Press reported in January 2026 that while the US government has never publicly accused Delcy Rodríguez of criminal wrongdoing related to the drug trade, the Drug Enforcement Administration has nonetheless gathered an extensive intelligence file on Rodríguez since 2018 and designated her as a "priority target" in 2022—which the agency does for individuals suspected of having "significant impact" on the drug trade. In testimony before the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee on 28 January, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio did not confirm the story when asked by Senator Jeanne Shaheen and instead only noted that Rodríguez had not been indicted, saying: "We are dealing with individuals that in our system would not be acceptable in the long term. But we are in a transition to stabilization phase. You have to work with the people currently in charge of the elements of government."

### United States military buildup

In August 2025, the United States began a military buildup in the southern Caribbean, deploying warships and military personnel. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) sent a team into Venezuela that began tracking Maduro's movements, using a source close to the Venezuelan president, and plans were made for the capture of Maduro months in advance. The Delta Force and other participants in the operation erected a mockup of the safe house in which Maduro was believed to be hiding, described by Trump as a "very highly guarded ... fortress". In September, the United States Southern Command began conducting military strikes on vessels in the Caribbean Sea, alleging some were trafficking drugs on behalf of Venezuela.

In November 2025, Venezuelan opposition leader María Corina Machado promised to open Venezuela's oil and gas reserves during a business meeting in Miami attended by Trump, and the Trump administration engaged in secret talks with Maduro's government about its oil reserves. In December 2025, this escalated to include seizures of sanctioned oil tankers carrying Venezuelan crude. These seizures formed part of the broader blockade on sanctioned oil preceding the January 2026 operation. The US also launched covert operations in Venezuela under the directive of the CIA in late December. On 2 January 2026, Trump announced that the US military would conduct strikes inside Venezuela.

In the weeks preceding the operation, Trinidad and Tobago signed an agreement with the US to allow US military access to its airports. General Dan Caine, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in a 3 January press conference that the US military had spent months planning and rehearsing the operation, with forces positioned and ready by early December. In late December, the US escalated its military efforts against Venezuela onto land, including striking a remote northern port reportedly used by Tren de Aragua for smuggling. At that time, Maduro rejected an offer from the US to go into exile in Turkey. According to *The New York Times*, Maduro's public displays downplaying the seriousness of the American threats in the weeks before the operation, such as through public dancing on a stage to electronic music sampling one of his speeches in which Maduro said "No crazy war", were a factor in Trump deciding to begin the operation.

President Trump stated that the operation had been ready to launch several days earlier but was postponed due to poor weather and cloud cover, which made flying into Caracas hazardous. General Caine, added that US forces waited for conditions to improve to minimize the risk to civilian populations and explained that the mission proceeded only after the weather "broke just enough" to allow aircraft to maneuver safely into position.

### Discussions with other members of Maduro's government

According to anonymous sources, Reuters reported that United States officials established conversations with Venezuelan minister of interior Diosdado Cabello months before, in order to avoid using the security services or militant ruling-party supporters to target the Venezuelan opposition in case of an attack.

According to the *Miami Herald*, a circle of Venezuelan officials centered on Delcy Rodríguez and her brother, Jorge, privately outlined a roadmap for post-Maduro Venezuela, in which Delcy would act as figurehead and exiled general Miguel Rodríguez Torres (no relationship to the Rodriguez siblings) would lead a "transitional government", dubbed "Madurismo without Maduro"; in return, Venezuela would welcome US investors and gradually loosen ties to US rivals such as Iran and Russia. The Venezuelan proposals were made to US envoy Richard Grenell through Qatari channels; the Trump administration reportedly rejected the overtures. According to the *Financial Times*, Delcy Rodríguez's brother Jorge Rodríguez had held talks with the United States government in 2025 to have his sister lead a post-Maduro transitional government, though those talks had included Maduro being allowed to go into exile instead of being captured. Anonymous sources speaking for *The Guardian* said that Delcy and Jorge Rodríguez were communicating with the American and Qatar officials. According to American officials she told them in December that "'Maduro needs to go" and stating "I'll work with whatever is the aftermath.'"


## Strikes

Clockwise from top

:

- President Donald Trump (*right*) during Operation Absolute Resolve, alongside CIA Director John Ratcliffe (*left*)
- Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen Dan Caine (*left*), alongside Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth (*right*)
- Trump (*left*), alongside Secretary of State Marco Rubio (*center*) and Deputy Chief of Staff Stephen Miller (*right*)

According to US Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen Dan Caine, Trump gave the order to proceed at 23:46 VET (22:46 EST) on 2 January. The administration did not notify the United States Congress in advance of the strikes, saying they had concerns that this could endanger the mission. According to Semafor, *The New York Times* and *The Washington Post* knew about the strikes before they were carried out. At least seven explosions were reported at around 02:00 VET (01:00 EST) on 3 January, and low-flying aircraft were seen, predominantly in La Guaira, Higuerote, Meseta de Mamo, Baruta, El Hatillo, Charallave, and Carmen de Uria, most of which are in or near the capital city Caracas.

The operation involved 150 aircraft from the United States Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. They included airplanes (Lockheed Martin F-22A Raptor, Lockheed Martin F-35A/C Lightning II, Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, Boeing EA-18G Growler, Grumman E-2D Hawkeye, Rockwell B-1B Lancer) and helicopters (Boeing MH-47G Chinooks and MH-60M DAP), refueling tankers, electronic-warfare (EW) planes, other support aircraft, and numerous unmanned aerial vehicles (including the Lockheed Martin RQ-170 Sentinel). Trump said the United States "had a fighter jet for every possible situation".

Following the operation, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt shared an eyewitness account of Venezuelan military personnel suffering injuries consistent with sonic weaponry during the American strike. Trump later told Katie Pavlich that "we have weapons nobody else knows about [...] we have some amazing weapons. That was an amazing attack." In a separate interview with the *New York Post*, he referred to one of these as a secret weapon called a "discombobulator," saying it caused Venezuelan defense systems, including Russian and Chinese rockets, to "not work," and that forces "pressed buttons and nothing worked." While Trump suggested the device disrupted equipment, CNN noted that reports of personnel injuries may have involved other technologies, such as acoustic or non-lethal systems such as the Active Denial System, rather than the classified weapon he described.

The operation reportedly used one-way attack drones, which is believed to be the first such operational usage by the US military. Most of the explosions targeted antennas and active military bases. Early reports suggested that the explosions were at Generalissimo Francisco de Miranda Air Base (La Carlota) and Fort Tiuna, two military installations in Caracas. Large explosions were also reported at Higuerote Airport, on the Venezuelan coast. Helicopters from the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment carried Delta Force soldiers into Caracas with air cover provided by the fighters and bombers. One helicopter was damaged by Venezuelan ground defenses but continued on its mission. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) personnel, including the Hostage Rescue Team, accompanied the military to formally arrest Maduro at his compound.

The strikes lasted half an hour. Smoke was seen rising from one military hangar in a Caracas base, while another was left unpowered. The strikes happened under the cover of darkness as a result of both the timing of the operation and the US military's disruption of power in the city of Caracas. Multiple shipping containers were destroyed and damaged in the La Guaira port strikes. Satellite imagery from Vantor showed at least five destroyed warehouses, burned vehicles, and a blown-up security post. An aircraft, believed to be a Beechcraft Baron, and a Buk-M2E surface-to-air missile system were destroyed at Higuerote Airport. The Venezuelan Science and Technology Minister Gabriela Jiménez Ramírez shared footage on social media of crumbled buildings of the Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research (IVIC) in La Guaira which she attributed to strikes of AGM-154 glide bombs by the United States. The Venezuelan government said that Maduro declared a national state of emergency after the explosions began. The Venezuelan government promised to defend against US military actions which it accused of seeking regime change. It described them as "imperialist aggression" and called for the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) to be convened.


## Capture of Maduro

At 05:21 Venezuelan Standard Time (VET) or 04:21 Eastern Standard Time (ET), Trump announced that Maduro and Flores had been captured and flown out of the country. The capture was undertaken by the US Army's Delta Force, with on-the-ground intelligence provided by the CIA. Trump posted a photograph on his Truth Social account of Maduro on board USS *Iwo Jima*, showing him blindfolded, with soundproof headphones and a gray Nike sweatsuit, holding a plastic water bottle. According to US Secretary of State Marco Rubio, Maduro was "arrested" and would face criminal charges in the US.

Nahum Fernández, leader of the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela, said Maduro and Flores were captured at Fort Tiuna; they reportedly slept at multiple locations and had a "fortress-like" compound at Fort Tiuna. Delcy Rodríguez confirmed that both Maduro and Flores were missing and demanded confirmation they were alive via an audio message on state television. According to Reuters sources, Rodríguez was in Russia on 3 January 2026. While other rumors indicate she was vacationing in Margarita Island. Other reports indicated that Rodríguez was in Caracas.

Shortly before 18:00 VET (17:00 EST), the airplane carrying Maduro and Flores landed at Stewart Air National Guard Base in New York. He was seen walking off the jet, surrounded by federal agents, before entering a hangar. He was then flown by helicopter to the Westside Heliport in Manhattan, New York City and then taken by an armored convoy to a local Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) field office where he was processed before ultimately being held in the Metropolitan Detention Center Brooklyn.

### Legal proceedings

Hours after the capture, the United States attorney general Pam Bondi announced that Maduro and Flores had been indicted in the Southern District of New York on charges related to "narcoterrorism". The indictment listed the charges as narco-terrorism conspiracy, cocaine importation conspiracy, possession of machine guns and destructive devices, and conspiracy to possess machine guns and destructive devices. The amended indictment did not refer to the Cartel of the Suns as an organized group as previously alleged by the US, but instead as a corrupt patronage system, which aligns with experts' descriptions of its operations.

Maduro and his wife were arraigned in a Manhattan federal court on 5 January 2026. Before pleading, Maduro said: "I am the president of Venezuela, I consider myself a prisoner of war. I was captured at my home in Caracas." Both pleaded not guilty to numerous drug trafficking charges. US District Judge Alvin Hellerstein ordered that Maduro be held until at least a 17 March hearing. However, this court appearance would later be delayed to 26 March 2026. Maduro and Flores would return to court as scheduled on 26 March 2026, and would afterwards be transferred back to jail in Brooklyn.


## Casualties

Venezuelan defense minister Vladimir Padrino López said that US combat helicopters fired rockets and missiles in urban areas and that officials were working to gather information on the number of fatalities and injuries. Padrino López also stated that most of Maduro's personal guard were killed during the attack. *The New York Times* reported on 3 January 2026 that an anonymous Venezuelan official said at least 40 people, including civilians and military personnel, were killed in the attack, updated to 80 on 4 January, "according to a senior Venezuelan official". Independent Venezuelan journalistic reports confirmed that most Venezuelan dead were among members of the presidential guard, with two civilian deaths.

The presence of Cuban troops in Venezuela was made public after the attack. Their presence was denied as far back as 2008. In 2019 Maduro had claimed in an interview that no Cuban military personnel were stationed in the country and that his personal guard was Venezuelan. Trump indicated that Cuban forces were involved in the operation, stating: "You know, a lot of Cubans were killed yesterday." The government of Cuba reported that 32 Cubans were killed in Venezuela, all members of armed forces and intelligence services. One of the most senior Cuban soldiers that died, Colonel Humberto Roca, was responsible for Fidel Castro's security in the past. According to Reuters reporting in February, anonymous Venezuelan officials indicated that some Cuban security forces and medical doctors in Venezuela were returning to Cuba, diminishing their role in Venezuelan politics. According to some officials, Cubans were being removed from their posts in Venezuela's General Directorate of Military Counterintelligence (DGCIM).

On 6 January 55 military deaths were confirmed: the victims were 32 Cubans and 23 Venezuelans. Both the countries released on the same day the identities of the killed soldiers. Also on 6 January, military forces posted a video on social media in honor of 24 soldiers killed during the attack. Attorney General Tarek William Saab indicated that dozens of military personnel and civilians were killed and the total number is still under investigation. A day later, Diosdado Cabello said that 100 persons died during the bombing. Independent monitors reported as of 7 January Venezuelan military casualties as of 6 January of 42 or 43 soldiers (mostly at Fort Tiuna), in addition to the 32 Cuban military personnel, and 2 civilians. On 16 January, Venezuelan defense minister Vladimir Padrino López, said that 47 soldiers, including 9 women, were killed during the attack. Acting president Delcy Rodríguez declared seven days of mourning for the soldiers killed during the attack. The remains of the Cuban fatalities were repatriated on 15 January. They received a mass funeral ceremony in Havana upon arrival.

In Catia La Mar, strikes hit a three-story civilian apartment complex, killing one person, seriously injuring another, and destroying the exterior wall. Yohana Rodríguez Sierra, a Colombian citizen, was reported as a civilian fatality in El Hatillo. The US had been bombing nearby telecommunications antennas, according to the victim's relative.

According to the Department of Defense, seven US soldiers were injured and expected to survive. The soldiers suffered shrapnel and gunfire wounds. During the 2026 State of the Union Address, Trump awarded the Medal of Honor to Chief Warrant Officer Eric Slover, one of the helicopter pilots that got injured during the operation. Slover was the lead Chinook pilot for the air assault element of the operation. His helicopter came under fire as the flight approached Maduro's compound, and he was hit in the leg and hip by four bullets. His aircraft was also hit but remained flyable. Despite his wounds, Slover maintained control of the aircraft and got the Delta Team onboard over the compound and allowed them to fast rope to the ground. He then flew back to the USS Iwo Jima located in the Caribbean Sea.
