---
title: "TI MSP430 (part 1/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MSP430
domain: ti-rtos
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: ti-rtos kernel, sysbios scheduler, msp430 mcu, code composer studio
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 1/2
---

# TI MSP430

(Redirected from

MSP430

)

The **MSP430** is a mixed-signal microcontroller family from Texas Instruments, first introduced on 14 February 1992. Built around a 16-bit CPU, the MSP430 was designed for low power consumption, embedded applications and low cost.


## Features

The fundamental feature of the MSP430 is low power consumption. The first MSP430s (MSP430C3xx) had a consumption around 400 uA/MHz and less than 2 uA in low-power mode with active basic timer and LCD driver. The more recent MSPs (MSP430FR5xx) have active mode consumption around 100-120 uA/MHz and 500 nA in low-power mode with active RTC. The consumption of the CPU itself is less than 32 uA/MHz. The MSP430FR series, which use FRAM instead of a flash, also allow fast writing to a non-volatile memory without additional power requirements.

The MSP430s use up to seven different low-power modes. The wake-up times differ on the mode and MSP430 generation. The fastest MSP430-family processors have wake-up times under 1 microsecond.

The MSP430s can run up to 25 MHz, while register-to-register operations take 1 cycle per instruction. The MSP430 family has more than 550 types, not counted package variants. There are microcontrollers with 0.5–512 KB flash or 0.5–256 KB FRAM and up to 66 KB RAM.

The device comes in a variety of generations featuring the usual peripherals:

- Internal oscillator,
- Timer including pulse-width modulation (PWM),
- Watchdog timer,
- USART,
- Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) bus,
- Inter-Integrated Circuit (I²C),
- Analog-to-digital converter (ADC) options:
  - 10/12/14-bit successive-approximation ADC
  - 16/24-bit delta–sigma ADC
  - internal analog comparator with digital timers
    - Can measure resistor-capacitor slope charging time
- Brownout reset circuitry.

Some less usual peripheral options include on-chip operational amplifiers (op-amp) for signal conditioning, 12-bit digital-to-analog converter (DAC), liquid crystal display (LCD) driver, hardware multiplier, USB, and direct memory access (DMA) for ADC results. Apart from some older erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM, such as MSP430E3xx) and high volume mask ROM (MSP430Cxxx) versions, all of the devices are in-system programming enabled via Joint Test Action Group (JTAG), full four-wire or Spy-Bi-Wire), a built in bootstrapping loader (BSL) using UART such as RS-232, or USB on devices with USB support. No BSL is included in F20xx, G2xx0, G2xx1, G2xx2, or I20xx family devices.

### Memory limitations

There are, however, limits that preclude its use in more complex embedded systems. The MSP430 does not have an external memory bus, so it is limited to on-chip memory, up to 512 KB flash memory and 66 KB random-access memory (RAM), which may be too small for applications needing large buffers or data tables. Also, although it has a DMA controller, it is very difficult to use it to move data off the chip due to a lack of a DMA output strobe.


## MSP430 CPU

### Architecture

The MSP430 CPU uses a von Neumann architecture, with a single address space for instructions and data. Memory is byte-addressed, and pairs of bytes are combined little-endian to make 16-bit words.

The processor contains 16 16-bit registers, of which four are dedicated to special purposes: R0 is the program counter, R1 is the stack pointer, R2 is the status register, and R3 is a "constant generator" which reads as zero and ignores writes. Added address mode encodings using R3 and R2 allow a total of six commonly used constant values (0, 1, 2, 4, 8 and −1) without needing an immediate operand word. R4 through R15 are available for general use.

The instruction set is very simple: 27 instructions exist in three categories. Most instructions occur in .B (8-bit byte) and .W (16-bit word) suffixed versions, depending on the value of a B/W bit: the bit is set to 1 for 8-bit and 0 for 16-bit. A missing suffix is equivalent to .W. Byte operations to memory affect only the addressed byte, while byte operations to registers clear the most significant byte.

The 10-bit signed jump offset is stored as a word displacement. The offset is doubled before being added to the PC. 16-bit jumps can be implemented with a `MOV` or `ADD` instruction

### Instruction set

MSP430 instruction set

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Instruction

0

0

0

1

0

0

opcode

B/W

As

register

Single-operand arithmetic

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

B/W

As

register

RRC

Rotate right (1 bit) through carry

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

As

register

SWPB

Swap bytes

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

B/W

As

register

RRA

Rotate right (1 bit) arithmetic

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

As

register

SXT

Sign extend byte to word

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

0

B/W

As

register

PUSH

Push value onto stack

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

1

0

As

register

CALL

Subroutine call; push PC and move source to PC

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

RETI

Return from interrupt; pop SR then pop PC

0

0

1

condition

10-bit signed offset

Conditional jump; PC = PC + 2×offset + 2

0

0

1

0

0

0

10-bit signed offset

JNE

/

JNZ

Jump if not equal/zero

0

0

1

0

0

1

10-bit signed offset

JEQ

/

JZ

Jump if equal/zero

0

0

1

0

1

0

10-bit signed offset

JNC

/

JLO

Jump if no carry/lower

0

0

1

0

1

1

10-bit signed offset

JC

/

JHS

Jump if carry/higher or same

0

0

1

1

0

0

10-bit signed offset

JN

Jump if negative

0

0

1

1

0

1

10-bit signed offset

JGE

Jump if greater or equal

0

0

1

1

1

0

10-bit signed offset

JL

Jump if less

0

0

1

1

1

1

10-bit signed offset

JMP

Jump (unconditionally)

opcode

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

Two-operand arithmetic

0

1

0

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

MOV

Move source to destination

0

1

0

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

ADD

Add source to destination

0

1

1

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

ADDC

Add source and carry to destination

0

1

1

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

SUBC

Subtract source from destination (with carry)

1

0

0

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

SUB

Subtract source from destination

1

0

0

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

CMP

Compare (pretend to subtract) source from destination

1

0

1

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

DADD

Decimal

add source to destination (with carry)

1

0

1

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

BIT

Test bits of source AND destination

1

1

0

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

BIC

Bit clear (dest &= ~src)

1

1

0

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

BIS

Bit set (logical OR)

1

1

1

0

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

XOR

Exclusive or

source with destination

1

1

1

1

source

Ad

B/W

As

destination

AND

Logical AND

source with destination (dest &= src)

Instructions are 16 bits, followed by up to two 16-bit extension words. Addressing modes are specified by the 2-bit source addressing mode (As) and the 1-bit destination addressing mode (Ad) fields. Some special versions can be constructed using R0, and modes other than register direct using R2 (the status register) and R3 (the constant generator) are interpreted specially. As Ad is only 1-bit, it can specify only a subset of the addressing modes for As.

Indexed addressing modes add a 16-bit extension word to the instruction. If both source and destination are indexed, the source extension word comes first. *x* refers to the next extension word in the instruction stream in the table below.

| As | Ad | Register | Syntax | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 00 | 0 | *n* | **R*n*** | Register direct. The operand is the contents of R*n*. |
| 01 | 1 | *n* | ***x*(R*n*)** | Indexed. The operand is in memory at address R*n*+*x*. |
| 10 | — | *n* | **@R*n*** | Register indirect. The operand is in memory at the address held in R*n*. |
| 11 | — | *n* | **@R*n*+** | Indirect autoincrement. As above, then the register is incremented by 1 or 2. |
|   |   |   |   |   |
| Addressing modes using R0 (PC) |   |   |   |   |
| 01 | 1 | 0 (PC) | ***ADDR*** | Symbolic. Equivalent to x(PC). The operand is in memory at address PC+*x*. |
| 11 | — | 0 (PC) | **#*x*** | Immediate. Equivalent to @PC+. The operand is the next word in the instruction stream. |
|   |   |   |   |   |
| Addressing modes using R2 (SR) and R3 (CG), special-case decoding |   |   |   |   |
| 01 | 1 | 2 (SR) | **&*ADDR*** | Absolute. The operand is in memory at address *x*. |
| 10 | — | 2 (SR) | **#4** | Constant. The operand is the constant 4. |
| 11 | — | 2 (SR) | **#8** | Constant. The operand is the constant 8. |
| 00 | — | 3 (CG) | **#0** | Constant. The operand is the constant 0. |
| 01 | — | 3 (CG) | **#1** | Constant. The operand is the constant 1. There is no index word. |
| 10 | — | 3 (CG) | **#2** | Constant. The operand is the constant 2. |
| 11 | — | 3 (CG) | **#−1** | Constant. The operand is the constant −1. |

Instructions generally take 1 cycle per word fetched or stored, so instruction times range from 1 cycle for a simple register-register instruction to 6 cycles for an instruction with both source and destination indexed.

The MSP430X extension with 20-bit addressing adds added instructions that can require up to 10 clock cycles. Setting or clearing a peripheral bit takes two clocks. A jump, taken or not takes two clocks. With the 2xx series 2 MCLKs is 125 ns at 16 MHz.

Moves to the program counter are allowed and perform jumps. Return from subroutine, for example, is implemented as `MOV @SP+,PC`.

When R0 (PC) or R1 (SP) are used with the autoincrement addressing mode, they are always incremented by two. Other registers (R4 through R15) are incremented by the operand size, either 1 or 2 bytes.

The status register contains four arithmetic status bits, a global interrupt enable, and four bits that disable various clocks to enter low-power mode. When handling an interrupt, the processor saves the status register on the stack and clears the low-power bits. If the interrupt handler does not modify the saved status register, returning from the interrupt will then resume the original low-power mode.

### Pseudo-operations

Many added instructions are implemented as aliases for forms of the above. For example, there is no specific "return from subroutine" instruction, but it is implemented as `MOV @SP+,PC`. Emulated instructions are:

| Emulated | Actual | Description |
|---|---|---|
| **ADC**.*x* *dst* | ADDC.*x* #0,*dst* | Add carry to destination |
| **BR** *dst* | MOV *dst*,PC | Branch to destination |
| **CLR**.*x* *dst* | MOV.*x* #0,*dst* | Clear destination |
| **CLRC** | BIC #1,SR | Clear carry bit |
| **CLRN** | BIC #4,SR | Clear negative bit |
| **CLRZ** | BIC #2,SR | Clear zero bit |
| **DADC**.*x* *dst* | DADD.*x* #0,*dst* | Decimal add carry to destination |
| **DEC**.*x* *dst* | SUB.*x* #1,*dst* | Decrement |
| **DECD**.*x* *dst* | SUB.*x* #2,*dst* | Double decrement |
| **DINT** | BIC #8,SR | Disable interrupts |
| **EINT** | BIS #8,SR | Enable interrupts |
| **INC**.*x* *dst* | ADD.*x* #1,*dst* | Increment |
| **INCD**.*x* *dst* | ADD.*x* #2,*dst* | Double increment |
| **INV**.*x* *dst* | XOR.*x* #−1,*dst* | Invert |
| **NOP** | MOV #0,R3 | No operation |
| **POP** *dst* | MOV @SP+,*dst* | Pop from stack |
| **RET** | MOV @SP+,PC | Return from subroutine |
| **RLA**.*x* *dst* | ADD.*x* *dst*,*dst* | Rotate left arithmetic (shift left 1 bit) |
| **RLC**.*x* *dst* | ADDC.*x* *dst*,*dst* | Rotate left through carry |
| **SBC**.*x* *dst* | SUBC.*x* #0,*dst* | Subtract borrow (1−carry) from destination |
| **SET**.*x* *dst* | MOV.*x* #-1,*dst* | Set destination |
| **SETC** | BIS #1,SR | Set carry bit |
| **SETN** | BIS #4,SR | Set negative bit |
| **SETZ** | BIS #2,SR | Set zero bit |
| **TST**.*x* *dst* | CMP.*x* #0,*dst* | Test destination |

Note that the immediate constants −1 (0xffff), 0, 1, 2, 4 and 8 can be specified in a single-word instruction without needing a separate immediate operand.

### MSP430X 20-bit extension

The basic MSP430 cannot support more memory (ROM + RAM + peripherals) than its 64K address space. In order to support this, an extended form of the MSP430 uses 20-bit registers and a 20-bit address space, allowing up to 1 MB of memory. This uses the same instruction set as the basic form, but with two extensions:

1. A limited number of 20-bit instructions for common operations, and
2. A general prefix word mechanism that can extend any instruction to 20 bits.

The extended instructions include some added abilities, notably multibit shifts and multiregister load/store operations.

20-bit operations use the length suffix "A" (for address) instead of .B or .W. .W is still the default. In general, shorter operations clear the high-order bits of the destination register.

The new instructions are as follows:

MSP430X extended instructions

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Second word

Instruction

0

0

0

0

source

0

0

opcode

destination

Extended memory-register moves

0

0

0

0

src

0

0

0

0

dst

—

MOVA

@R

src

,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

0

0

0

1

dst

—

MOVA

@R

src

+,R

dst

0

0

0

0

addr[19:16]

0

0

1

0

dst

addr[15:0]

MOVA

&abs20,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

0

0

1

1

dst

x[15:0]

MOVA

x(R

src

),R

dst

0

0

0

0

n−1

op.

0

1

0

W/A

destination

Bit shifts (1–4 bit positions)

0

0

0

0

n−1

0

0

0

1

0

W/A

dst

—

RRCM

.

x

#

n

,R

dst

(Rotate right through carry.)

0

0

0

0

n−1

0

1

0

1

0

W/A

dst

—

RRAM

.

x

#

n

,R

dst

(Rotate right arithmetic, a.k.a. shift right signed.)

0

0

0

0

n−1

1

0

0

1

0

W/A

dst

—

RLAM

.

x

#

n

,R

dst

(Rotate left arithmetic, a.k.a. shift left.)

0

0

0

0

n−1

1

1

0

1

0

W/A

dst

—

RRUM

.

x

#

n

,R

dst

(Rotate right unsigned, a.k.a. shift right logical.)

0

0

0

0

source

0

1

1

op.

destination

Extended register-memory moves

0

0

0

0

src

0

1

1

0

addr[19:16]

addr[15:0]

MOVA

R

src

,&abs20

0

0

0

0

src

0

1

1

1

dst

x[15:0]

MOVA

R

src

,x(R

dst

)

0

0

0

0

source

1

opcode

destination

Extended ALU operations

0

0

0

0

imm[19:16]

1

0

0

0

dst

imm[15:0]

MOVA

#imm20,R

dst

0

0

0

0

imm[19:16]

1

0

0

1

dst

imm[15:0]

CMPA

#imm20,R

dst

0

0

0

0

imm[19:16]

1

0

1

0

dst

imm[15:0]

ADDA

#imm20,R

dst

0

0

0

0

imm[19:16]

1

0

1

1

dst

imm[15:0]

SUBA

#imm20,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

1

1

0

0

dst

—

MOVA

R

src

,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

1

1

0

1

dst

—

CMPA

R

src

,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

1

1

1

0

dst

—

ADDA

R

src

,R

dst

0

0

0

0

src

1

1

1

1

dst

—

SUBA

R

src

,R

dst

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

op.

mode

varies

CALLA

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

—

RETI

(Same as MSP430)

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

1

As

register

CALLA

source

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

abs[19:16]

abs[15:0]

CALLA

&abs20

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

1

x[19:16]

x[15:0]

CALLA

x(PC)

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

—

—

(reserved)

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

imm[19:16]

imm[15:0]

CALLA

#imm20

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

—

—

(reserved)

0

0

0

1

0

1

dir

W/A

n−1

register

Push/pop

n

registers

ending

with specified

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

W/A

n−1

src

—

PUSHM

.

x

#

n

,R

src

Push R

src

, R(

src

−1), ... R(

src

−

n

+1)

0

0

0

1

0

1

1

W/A

n−1

dst−n+1

—

POPM

.

x

#

n

,R

dst

Pop R(

dst

−

n

+1), R(

dst

−

n

+2), ... R

dst

All other instructions can have an prefix word added which extends them to 20 bits. The prefix word contains an added operand size bit, which is combined with the existing B/W bit to specify the operand size. One unused size combination exists; indications suggest that it may be used in future for a 32-bit operand size.

The prefix word comes in two formats, and the choice between them depends on the instruction which follows. If the instruction has any non-register operands, then the simple form is used, which provides two 4-bit fields to extend any offset or immediate constant in the instruction stream to 20 bits.

If the instruction is register-to-register, a different extension word is used. This includes a "ZC" flag which suppresses carry-in (useful for instructions like DADD which always use the carry bit), and a repeat count. A 4-bit field in the extension word encodes either a repeat count (0–15 repetitions in addition to the initial execution), or a register number which contains a 4-bit repeat count.

MSP430X prefix words

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Instruction

0

0

0

1

1

—

A/L

0

0

—

Extension word

0

0

0

1

1

src[19:16]

A/L

0

0

dst[19:16]

Memory operand extension

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

ZC

0

A/L

0

0

n−1

Register operand extension (immediate repeat count)

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

ZC

1

A/L

0

0

Rn

Register operand extension (register repeat count)

### Example code

The following assembler source code is for a subroutine named `memcpy` that copies a block of data words of a given size from one location to another. The data block is copied one word at a time.

| 1000 1000 44B5 0000 1004 5325 1006 5336 1008 43FB 100A 4130 100C ; memcpy -- ; Copy a block of memory from one location to another. ; ; Entry registers ; R4 - Address of source data block ; R5 - Address of target data block ; R6 - Number of words to copy org 1000h ;Origin at 1000h memcpy: mov.w @r4+,0(r5) ;Copy word from @r4 to @r5, bump r4 add.w #2,r5 ;Bump dest pointer add.w #-1,r6 ;Dec word counter jnz memcpy ;Jump if r6 ≠ 0 mov.w @sp+,pc ;Return end |
|---|


## MSP430 address space

The general layout of the MSP430 address space is:

**0x0000–0x0007**

Processor special function registers (interrupt control registers)

**0x0008–0x00FF**

8-bit peripherals. These must be accessed using 8-bit loads and stores.

**0x0100–0x01FF**

16-bit peripherals. These must be accessed using 16-bit loads and stores.

**0x0200–0x09FF**

Up to 2048 bytes of

RAM

.

**0x0C00–0x0FFF**

1024 bytes of bootstrap loader ROM (flash parts only).

**0x1000–0x10FF**

256 bytes of data

flash ROM

(flash parts only).

**0x1800-0x19FF**

512 bytes of data

FRAM

(most FRAM MCUs, user-writable containing no calibration data)

**0x1100–0x38FF**

Extended RAM on models with more than 2048 bytes of RAM. (0x1100–0x18FF is a copy of 0x0200–0x09FF)

**0x1100–0xFFFF**

Up to 60

kilobytes

of program ROM. Smaller ROMs start at higher addresses. The last 16 or 32 bytes are

interrupt vectors

.

A few models include more than 2048 bytes of RAM; in that case RAM begins at 0x1100. The first 2048 bytes (0x1100–0x18FF) is mirrored at 0x0200–0x09FF for compatibility. Also, some recent models bend the 8-bit and 16-bit peripheral rules, allowing 16-bit access to peripherals in the 8-bit peripheral address range.

There is a new extended version of the architecture (named MSP430X) which allows a 20-bit address space. It allows added program ROM beginning at 0x10000.

The '5xx series has a greatly redesigned address space, with the first 4K devoted to peripherals, and up to 16K of RAM.


## Peripherals

The MSP430 peripherals are generally easy to use, with (mostly) consistent addresses between models, and no write-only registers (except for the hardware multiplier).

### General purpose I/O ports 0–10

If the peripheral is not needed, the pin may be used for general purpose I/O. The pins are divided into 8-bit groups called "ports", each of which is controlled by a number of 8-bit registers. In some cases, the ports are arranged in pairs which can be accessed as 16-bit registers.

The MSP430 family defines 11 I/O ports, P0 through P10, although no chip implements more than 10 of them. P0 is only implemented on the '3xx family. P7 through P10 are only implemented on the largest members (and highest pin count versions) of the '4xx and '2xx families. The newest '5xx and '6xx families has P1 through P11, and the control registers are reassigned to provide more port pairs. Each port is controlled by the following registers. Ports which do not implement particular features (such as interrupt on state change) do not implement the corresponding registers.

**P*x*IN**

Port

x

input. This is a read-only register, and reflects the current state of the port's pins.

**P*x*OUT**

Port

x

output. The values written to this read/write register are driven out the corresponding pins when they are configured to output.

**P*x*DIR**

Port

x

data direction. Bits written as 1 configure the corresponding pin for output. Bits written as 0 configure the pin for input.

**P*x*SEL**

Port

x

function select. Bits written as 1 configure the corresponding pin for use by the specialized peripheral. Bits written as 0 configure the pin for general purpose I/O. Port 0 ('3xx parts only) is not multiplexed with other peripherals and does not have a P0SEL register.

**P*x*REN**

Port

x

resistor enable ('2xx & '5xx only). Bits set in this register enable weak

pull-up

or

pull-down resistors

on the corresponding I/O pins even when they are configured as inputs. The direction of the pull is set by the bit written to the P

x

OUT register.

**P*x*DS**

Port

x

drive strength ('5xx only). Bits set in this register enable high current outputs. This increases output power, but may cause

electromagnetic interference

(EMI).

Ports 0–2 can produce interrupts when inputs change. Further registers configure this ability:

**P*x*IES**

Port

x

interrupt edge select. Selects the edge which will cause the P

x

IFG bit to be set. When the input bit changes from matching the P

x

IES state to not matching it (i.e. whenever a bit in P

x

IES XOR P

x

IN changes from clear to set), the corresponding P

x

IFG bit is set.

**P*x*IE**

Port

x

interrupt enable. When this bit and the corresponding P

x

IFG bit are both set, an interrupt is generated.

**P*x*IFG**

Port

x

interrupt flag. Set whenever the corresponding pin makes the state change requested by P

x

IES. Can be cleared only by software. (Can also be set by software.)

**P*x*IV**

Port

x

interrupt vector ('5xx only). This 16-bit register is a

priority encoder

which can be used to handle pin-change interrupts. If

n

is the lowest-numbered interrupt bit which is pending in P

x

IFG and enabled in P

x

IE, this register reads as 2

n

+2. If there is no such bit, it reads as 0. The scale factor of 2 allows direct use as an offset into a

branch table

. Reading this register also clears the reported P

x

IFG flag.

Some pins have special purposes either as inputs or outputs. (For example, timer pins can be configured as capture inputs or PWM outputs.) In this case, the P*x*DIR bit controls which of the two functions the pin performs when the P*x*SEL bit is set. If there is only one special function, then P*x*DIR is generally ignored. The P*x*IN register is still readable if the P*x*SEL bit is set, but interrupt generation is disabled. If P*x*SEL is clear, the special function's input is frozen and disconnected from the external pin. Also, configuring a pin for general purpose output does *not* disable interrupt generation.

| '1xx–'4xx families P*x*IN P*x*OUTP*x*DIRP*x*SELP*x*IESP*x*IE P*x*IFGP*x*REN P0 0x100x110x120x130x140x15 P1 0x200x210x220x260x240x250x230x27 P2 0x280x290x2a0x2e0x2c0x2d0x2b0x2f P3 0x180x190x1a0x1b0x10 P4 0x1c0x1d0x1e0x1f0x11 P5 0x300x310x320x330x12 P6 0x340x350x360x370x13 PAP7 0x380x3a0x3c0x3e0x14 P8 0x390x3b0x3d0x3f0x15 PBP9 0x080x0a0x0c0x0e0x16 P10 0x090x0b0x0d0x0f0x17 | '5xx–'6xx & '0xx families P*x*IN P*x*OUTP*x*DIRP*x*RENP*x*DS P*x*SELP*x*IV P*x*IESP*x*IE P*x*IFG PAP1 0x2000x2020x2040x2060x2080x20A0x20E0x2180x21A0x21C P2 0x2010x2030x2050x2070x2090x20B0x21E0x2190x21B0x21D PBP3 0x2200x2220x2240x2260x2280x22A P4 0x2210x2230x2250x2270x2290x22B PCP5 0x2400x2420x2440x2460x2480x24A P6 0x2410x2430x2450x2470x2490x24B PDP7 0x2600x2620x2640x2660x2680x26A P8 0x2610x2630x2650x2670x2690x26B PEP9 0x2800x2820x2840x2860x2880x28A P10 0x2810x2830x2850x2870x2890x28B P11 0x2A00x2A20x2A40x2A60x2A80x2AA PJ 0x3200x3220x3240x3260x328*4 bits only; shared with JTAG pins.* |
|---|---|

### Integrated peripherals

**Analog**

- Analog-to-digital converter

The MSP430 line offers two types of

analog-to-digital conversion

(ADC). 10- and 12-bit

successive approximation

converters, as well as a 16-bit

sigma–delta converter

. Data transfer controllers and a 16-word conversion-and-control buffer allow the MSP430 to convert and store samples without CPU intervention, minimizing power consumption.

- Analog pool

The Analog Pool (A-POOL) module can be configured as an ADC, DAC, comparator, SVS or temperature sensor. It allows flexibility for the user to program a series of analog functions with only one setup.

- Comparator A, A+

The MSP430's comparator module provides precision slope analog-to-digital conversions. Monitors external analog signals and provides voltage and resistor value measurement. Capable of selectable power modes.

- DAC12

The DAC12 module is a 12-bit, voltage-output DAC featuring internal/external reference selection and programmable settling time for optimal power consumption. It can be configured in 8- or 12-bit mode. When multiple DAC12 modules are present, they may be grouped together for synchronous update operation.

- Op Amps

Feature single supply, low current operation with rail-to-rail outputs and programmable settling times. Software selectable configuration options: unity gain mode, comparator mode, inverting PGA, non-inverting PGA, differential and instrumentation amplifier.

- Sigma–Delta (SD)

The SD16/SD16_A/SD24_A modules each feature 16-/24-bit sigma–delta A/D converters with an internal 1.2-V reference. Each converter has up to eight fully differential multiplexed inputs, including a built-in temperature sensor. The converters are second-order oversampling sigma–delta modulators with selectable oversampling ratios of up to 1024 (SD16_A/SD24_A) or 256 (SD16).

**Timers**

- Basic timer (BT)

The BT has two independent 8-bit timers that can be cascaded to form a 16-bit timer/counter. Both timers can be read and written by software. The BT is extended to provide an integrated RTC. An internal calendar compensates for months with less than 31 days and includes leap-year correction.

- Real-Time Clock

RTC_A/B are 32-bit hardware counter modules that provide clock counters with a calendar, a flexible programmable alarm, and calibration. The RTC_B includes a switchable battery backup system that provides the ability for the RTC to operate when the primary supply fails.

- 16-bit timers

Timer_A, Timer_B and Timer_D are asynchronous 16-bit timers/counters with up to seven capture/compare registers and various operating modes. The timers support multiple capture/compares, PWM outputs, and interval timing. They also have extensive interrupt capabilities. Timer_B introduces added features such as programmable timer lengths (8-, 10-, 12-, or 16-bit) and double-buffered compare register updates, while Timer_D introduces a high-resolution (4

ns) mode.

- Watchdog (WDT+)

The WDT+ performs a controlled system restart after a software problem occurs. If the selected time interval expires, a system reset is generated. If the watchdog function is not needed in an application, the module can be configured as an interval timer and can generate interrupts at selected time intervals.

**System**

- Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)

The AES accelerator module performs encryption and decryption of 128-bit data with 128-bit keys according to the advanced encryption standard in hardware, and can be configured with user software.

- Brown-Out Reset (BOR)

The BOR circuit detects low supply voltages and resets the device by triggering a power-on reset (POR) signal when power is applied or removed. The MSP430 MCU’s zero-power BOR circuit is continuously turned on, including in all low-power modes.

- Direct Memory Access (DMA) Controller

The DMA controller transfers data from one address to another across the entire address range without CPU intervention. The DMA increases the throughput of peripheral modules and reduces system power consumption. The module features up to three independent transfer channels.

Although the MSP430's DMA subsystem is very capable it has several flaws, the most significant of which is the lack of an external transfer strobe. Although a DMA transfer can be triggered externally, there is no external indication of completion of a transfer. Consequently DMA to and from external sources is limited to external trigger per byte transfers, rather than full blocks automatically via DMA. This can lead to significant complexity (as in requiring extensive hand tweaking of code) when implementing processor to processor or processor to USB communications.

The reference cited uses an obscure timer mode to generate high speed strobes for DMA transfers. The timers are not flexible enough to easily make up for the lack of an external DMA transfer strobe.

DMA operations that involve word transfers to byte locations cause truncation to 8 bits rather than conversion to two byte transfers. This makes DMA with A/D or D/A 16 bit values less useful than it could be (although it is possible to DMA these values through port A or B on some versions of the MSP 430 using an externally visible trigger per transfer such as a timer output).

- Enhanced Emulation Module (EEM)

The EEM provides different levels of debug features such as 2-8 hardware breakpoints, complex breakpoints, break when read/write occurs at specified address, and more. Embedded into all flash-based MSP430 devices.

- Hardware multiplier

Some MSP430 models include a memory-mapped hardware multiplier peripheral which performs various 16×16+32→33-bit multiply-accumulate operations. Unusually for the MSP430, this peripheral does include an implicit 2-bit write-only register, which makes it effectively impossible to

context switch

. This peripheral does not interfere with CPU activities and can be accessed by the DMA. The MPY on all MSP430F5xx and some MSP430F4xx devices feature up to 32-bit x 32-bit.

The 8 registers used are:

| Address | Name | Function |
|---|---|---|
| 0x130 | MPY | Operand1 for unsigned multiply |
| 0x132 | MPYS | Operand1 for signed multiply |
| 0x134 | MAC | Operand1 for unsigned multiply-accumulate |
| 0x136 | MACS | Operand1 for signed multiply-accumulate |
| 0x138 | OP2 | Second operand for multiply operation |
| 0x13A | ResLo | Low word of multiply result |
| 0x13C | ResHi | High word of multiply result |
| 0x13E | SumExt | Carry out of multiply-accumulate |

The first operand is written to one of four 16-bit registers. The address written determines the operation performed. While the value written can be read back from any of the registers, the register number written to cannot be recovered.

If a multiply-accumulate operation is desired, the

ResLo

and

ResHi

registers must also be initialized.

Then, each time a write is performed to the

OP2

register, a multiply is performed and the result stored or added to the result registers. The

SumExt

register is a read-only register that contains the carry out of the addition (0 or 1) in case of an unsigned multiply), or the sign extension of the 32-bit sum (0 or -1) in case of a signed multiply. In the case of a signed multiply-accumulate, the

SumExt

value must be combined with the most significant bit of the prior

SumHi

contents to determine the true carry out result (-1, 0, or +1).

The result is available after three clock cycles of delay, which is the time required to fetch a following instruction and a following index word. Thus, the delay is typically invisible. An explicit delay is only required if using an indirect addressing mode to fetch the result.

- Memory Protection Unit (MPU)

The FRAM MPU protects against accidental writes to designated read-only memory segments or execution of code from a constant memory. The MPU can set any portioning of memory with bit level addressing, making the complete memory accessible for read, write and execute operations in FRAM devices.

- Power management module (PMM)

The PMM generates a supply voltage for the core logic, and provides several mechanisms for the supervision and monitoring of both the voltage applied to the device and the voltage generated for the core. It is integrated with a low-dropout voltage regulator (LDO), brown-out reset (BOR), and a supply voltage supervisor and monitor.

- Supply-Voltage Supervisor (SVS)

The SVS is a configurable module used to monitor the AVCC supply voltage or an external voltage. The SVS can be configured to set a flag or generate a power-on reset (POR) when the supply voltage or external voltage drops below a user-selected threshold.

**Communication and Interface**

- Capacitive Touch Sense I/Os

The integrated capacitive touch sense I/O module offers several benefits to touch button and touch slider applications. The system does not require external components to create the self-oscillation (reducing bill of materials) and the capacitor (that defines the frequency of the self-oscillation) can be connected directly. In addition, there is no need for external MUXes to allow multiple pads and each I/O pad can directly serve as a cap sense input. A hysteresis of ~0.7

V ensures robust operation. Control and sequencing is done completely in software.

- General Purpose I/Os

MSP430 devices have up to 12 digital I/O ports implemented. Each port has eight I/O pins. Every I/O pin can be configured as either input or output, and can be individually read or written to. Ports P1 and P2 have interrupt capability. MSP430F2xx, F5xx and some F4xx devices feature built-in, individually configurable pull-up or pull-down resistors.

- Sub-GHz RF Front End

The flexible CC1101 sub-1

GHz transceiver delivers the sensitivity and blocking performance required to achieve successful communication links in any RF environment. It also features low current consumption and supports flexible data rates and modulation formats.

- USART (UART, SPI, I²C)

The universal synchronous/asynchronous receive/transmit (USART) peripheral interface supports asynchronous RS-232 and synchronous SPI communication with one hardware module. The MSP430F15x/16x USART modules also support I²C, programmable baud rate, and independent interrupt capability for receive and transmit.

- USB

The USB module is fully compliant with the USB 2.0 specification and supports control, interrupt and bulk transfers at a data rate of 12

Mbps (full speed). The module supports USB suspend, resume and remote wake-up operations and can be configured for up to eight input and eight output endpoints. The module includes an integrated physical interface (PHY); a phase-locked loop (PLL) for USB clock generation; and a flexible power-supply system enabling bus-powered and self-powered devices.

- USCI (UART, SPI, I²C, LIN, IrDA)

The universal serial communication interface (USCI) module features two independent channels that can be used simultaneously. The asynchronous channel (USCI_A) supports UART mode; SPI mode; pulse shaping for IrDA; and automatic baud-rate detection for LIN communications. The synchronous channel (USCI_B) supports I²C and SPI modes.

- USI (SPI, I²C)

The universal serial interface (USI) module is a synchronous serial communication interface with a data length of up to 16-bits and can support SPI and I²C communication with minimal software.

- Infrared Modulation

Available on the MSP430FR4xxx and MSP430FR2xxx series chips, this feature is configured via the SYSCFG register set. This peripheral ties into other peripherals (Timers, eUSCI_A) to generate an IR modulated signal on an output pin.

**Metering**

- ESP430 (integrated in FE42xx devices)

The ESP430CE module performs metering calculations independent of the CPU. Module has separate SD16, HW multiplier, and the ESP430 embedded processor engine for single-phase energy-metering applications.

- Scan Interface (SIF)

The SIF module, a programmable state machine with an analog front end, is used to automatically measure linear or rotational motion with the lowest possible power consumption. The module features support for different types of LC and resistive sensors and for quadrature encoding.

**Display**

- LCD/LCD_A/LCD_B

The LCD/LCD_A controller directly drives LCDs for up to 196 segments. Supports static, 2-mux, 3-mux, and 4-mux LCDs. LCD_A module has integrated charge pump for contrast control. LCD_B enables blinking of individual segments with separate blinking memory.

- LCD_E

The LCD_E controller comes with the newer MSP430FR4xxx series microcontrollers and directly drives LCDs up to 448 segments. Supports static, 2-mux, 3-mux, 4-mux, 5-mux, 6-mux, 7-mux, 8-mux (1/3 bias) LCDs. Segment and Common pins may be reprogrammed to available LCD drive pins. This peripheral may be driven in LPM3.5 (RTC running+Main CPU core shutdown low-power mode).


## Software development environment

Texas Instruments provides various hardware experimenter boards that support large (approximately two centimeters square) and small (approximately one millimeter square) MSP430 chips. TI also provides software development tools, both directly, and in conjunction with partners (see the full list of compilers, assemblers, and IDEs). One such toolchain is the IAR C/C++ compiler and *Integrated development environment*, or IDE. A Kickstart edition can be downloaded for free from TI or IAR; it is limited to 8 KB of C/C++ code in the compiler and debugger (assembly language programs of any size can be developed and debugged with this free toolchain).

TI also combines a version of its own compiler and tools with its Eclipse-based Code Composer Studio IDE (CCS). It sells full-featured versions, and offers a free version for download which has a code size limit of 16 KB. CCS supports in-circuit emulators, and includes a simulator and other tools; it can also work with other processors sold by TI.

For those who are more comfortable with the Arduino, there is also another software Energia, an open source electronics prototyping platform with the goal to bring the Wiring and Arduino framework to the Texas Instruments MSP430 based LaunchPad where Arduino code can be exported for programming MSP430 chips. The latest release of Energia supports the MSP-EXP430G2xxx, MSP-EXP430FR5739, MSP-EXP430FR5969, MSP-EXP430FR5994, MSP-EXP430F5529LP, Stellaris EK-LM4F120XL, Tiva-C EK-TM4C123GXL, Tiva-C EK-TM4C1294XL, CC3200 Wi-Fi LaunchPad.

The open source community produces a freely available software development toolset based on the GNU toolset. The GNU compiler is currently declined in three versions:

(MSPGCC)

(MSPGCC Uniarch)

TI consulted with RedHat to provide official support for the MSP430 architecture to the GNU Compiler Collection C/C++ compiler. This msp430-elf-gcc compiler is supported by TI's Code Composer Studio version 6.0 and higher.

There is a very early llvm-msp430 project, which may eventually provide better support for MSP430 in LLVM.

Other commercial development tool sets, which include editor, compiler, linker, assembler, debugger and in some cases code wizards, are available. VisSim, a block diagram language for model based development, generates efficient fixed point C-Code directly from the diagram. VisSim generated code for a closed loop ADC+PWM based PID control on the F2013 compiles to less than 1 KB flash and 100 bytes RAM. VisSim has on-chip peripheral blocks for the entire MSP430 family I²C, ADC, SD16, PWM.


## Development platforms

The MSP430F2013 and its siblings are set apart by the fact that (except for the MSP430G2 Value Line) it is the only MSP430 part that is available in a dual in-line package (DIP). Other variants in this family are only available in various surface-mount packages. TI has gone to some trouble to support the eZ430 development platform by making the raw chips easy for hobbyists to use in prototypes.

### eZ430-F2013

TI has tackled the low-budget problem by offering a very small experimenter board, the *eZ430-F2013*, on a USB stick (now obsolete). This made it easy for designers to choose the MSP430 chip for inexpensive development platforms that can be used with a computer. The eZ430-F2013 contains an MSP430F2013 microcontroller on a detachable prototyping board, and accompanying CD with development software. It is helpful for schools, hobbyists and garage inventors. It is also welcomed by engineers in large companies prototyping projects with capital budget problems.

### MSP430 LaunchPad

Texas Instruments released the MSP430 LaunchPad in July 2010 at a cost of $4.30. The MSP430 LaunchPad has an onboard flash emulator, USB, 2 programmable LEDs, and 1 programmable push button. As an addition to experimentation with the LaunchPad a shield board is available.

TI has since provided several new LaunchPads based on the MSP430 platform:

- MSP-EXP430F5529LP features the MSP430F5529 USB device-capable MCU with 128 KB flash and 8 KB SRAM
- MSP-EXP430FR5969 features the MSP430FR5969 FRAM MCU with 64 KB FRAM and 2 KB SRAM
- MSP-EXP430FR4133 features the MSP430FR4133 FRAM MCU with 16 KB FRAM, 2 KB SRAM and on-board LCD
- MSP-EXP430FR6989 features the MSP430FR6989 FRAM MCU with 128 KB FRAM, 2 KB SRAM, on-board LCD and Extended Scan Interface peripheral
- MSP-EXP430FR2311 features the MSP430FR2311 FRAM MCU with 4 KB FRAM, 1 KB SRAM, OpAmp and Transimpedance Amplifier peripheral
- MSP-EXP430FR2433 features the MSP430FR2433 FRAM MCU with 15.5 KB FRAM, 4 KB SRAM
- MSP-EXP430FR2355 features the MSP430FR2355 FRAM MCU with 32 KB FRAM, 4 KB SRAM, 12-bit ADC, 12-bit DAC, OpAmp/PGA, ICC for nested interrupts
- MSP-EXP430FR5994 features the MSP430FR5994 FRAM MCU with 256 KB FRAM, 8 KB SRAM, 12-bit ADC and LEA DSP peripheral

All three of these LaunchPads include an eZ-FET JTAG debugger with backchannel UART capable of 1 Mbit/s speeds. The FRAM LaunchPads (e.g. MSP-EXP430FR5969, MSP-EXP430FR4133) include EnergyTrace, a feature supported by TI's Code Composer Studio IDE for monitoring and analyzing power consumption.


## Debugging interface

In common with other microcontroller vendors, TI has developed a two-wire debugging interface found on some of their MSP430 parts that can replace the larger JTAG interface. The eZ430 Development Tool contains a full USB-connected flash emulation tool (FET) for this new two-wire protocol, named *Spy-Bi-Wire* by TI. Spy-Bi-Wire was initially introduced on only the smallest devices in the 'F2xx family with limited number of I/O pins, such as the MSP430F20xx, MSP430F21x2, and MSP430F22x2. The support for Spy-Bi-Wire has been expanded with the introduction of the latest '5xx family, where all devices have support Spy-Bi-Wire interface in addition to JTAG.

The advantage of the Spy-Bi-Wire protocol is that it uses only two communication lines, one of which is the dedicated _RESET line. The JTAG interface on the lower pin count MSP430 parts is multiplexed with general purpose I/O lines. This makes it relatively difficult to debug circuits built around the small, low-I/O-budget chips, since the full 4-pin JTAG hardware will conflict with anything else connected to those I/O lines. This problem is alleviated with the Spy-Bi-Wire-capable chips, which are still compatible with the normal JTAG interface for backwards compatibility with the old development tools.

JTAG debugging and flash programming tools based on OpenOCD and widely used in the ARM architecture community are not available for the MSP430. Programming tools specially designed for the MSP430 are marginally less expensive than JTAG interfaces that use OpenOCD. However, should it be discovered mid-project that more MIPS, more memory, and more I/O peripherals are needed, those tools will not transfer to a processor from another vendor.
