---
title: "17 October Revolution (part 4/5)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/17_October_Revolution
domain: lebanon
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: lebanon
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 4/5
---

# 17 October Revolution

On 14 May, the director of cash operations for the Lebanese central bank, Mazen Hamdan was arrested based on the suspicion of being involved in currency manipulation. The order for the director's arrest was issued by A Lebanese financial prosecutor, Ali Ibrahim. Although the prosecutor's office is yet to release a statement, security sources have confirmed that Hamdan is being held in detention while awaiting an investigation, according to Reuters. Following the arrest of Mazen Hamdan, Lebanon's Prime Minister Hassan Diab demanded for the allegations regarding the Lebanese pound to be looked into further, maintaining that the people of Lebanon are entitled to an explanation as to why the exchange rate has plummeted, Daily Sabah added.

### June protests

On 2 June, protesters in Lebanon took to social media to share preventive measures with protesters who gathered in several cities across the United States, over the murder of George Floyd, an unarmed black man in Minneapolis, Minnesota, by a white police officer. The Lebanese protesters further provided the US protesters with a list of items to carry along while demonstrating, as well as how to prevent themselves from the excessive use of force by security forces. The hashtag #Americarevolts in Arabic language which trended on Twitter was used by several protesters in Lebanon as a sign of solidarity.

On 4 June, In anticipation of the intended protest scheduled for Saturday by the civil movement, the period of general mobilization in Lebanon was extended to 5 July by the Lebanese Council of Ministers. The Lebanese aren't denied their right to protest, so far as they wear protective gear, avoid shutting down roads, starting violence with security forces, or destroying properties, the minister of Information Abdel-Samad stated. He added that the decision regarding the extension was reached in line with the recommendation of the Higher Defense Council. Prime minister Hassan Diab, despite his support for peaceful protests, expressed his fears and cautioned the people of Lebanon against taking advantage of the situation by turning it into violence.

On 6 June, several protesters returned to the streets for the first time since the COVID-19 lockdown was put in place. The protests reportedly turned violent when some anti-government protesters and supporters of the Iran-backed Shiite Hezbollah movement began to throw stones at each other, according to DW. As the thousands of protesters gathered in Beirut's Martyrs' Square clashed, the army was forced to intervene and stand in between the two groups. According to a statement by the Lebanese Red Cross on Twitter, 37 people were injured during the violence that erupted, with the majority of the victims treated at the scene.

On 11 June, fresh violence erupted in Lebanon's capital Beirut, after the Lebanese pound significantly depreciated against the US dollars as angry protesters took to the streets. Several roads were shut down across Lebanon by anti-government protesters, consequently clashing with security forces who used tear gas to disperse the crowd. According to CNN, protests also reportedly broke out in southern cities of Saida and Nabatieh, as well as the northern city of Tripoli, where demonstrators threw Molotov cocktails and stones at the city's central bank building. Following the series of heavy clashes that rocked Lebanon on Thursday, Prime Minister Hassan Diab called for an emergency cabinet meeting on Friday, in an attempt to discuss solutions to the country's financial crisis. BBC reported that President Michel Aoun disclosed that the central bank is expected to start injecting US dollars into the market, so as to stabilize the plummeted exchange rate.

On 12 June, the demonstration which started late Thursday evening, entered its second night, with security forces firing rubber bullets and tear gas after clashing with protesters in Beirut and northern Lebanon's Tripoli. Many public properties, shops, were destroyed by the protesters.

On 13 June, some Lebanese protesters in Beirut's Martyrs' Square were sighted wearing black with their faces colored in white, while moving around with a coffin covered with the Lebanese. As the protests in the capital and other cities across Lebanon reached its third consecutive day, hundreds of demonstrators rallied through the streets of Lebanon demanding for the Diab's government to quit. After 100 days in power, the government led by prime minister Hassan Diab was considered inadequate to alleviate the economic crisis.

On 18 June, Henri Chaoul, a top advisor for Lebanon's Minister of Finance in the International Monetary Fund negotiations resigned. Chaoul's publicly posted resignation directly placed blame on the government and ruling elite stating "Whilst the IMF has confirmed the quantum of these losses, the establishment (the political class, the monetary authorities, and the financial sector as a whole) has opted to dismiss the magnitude of these losses that impose themselves as an incontestable reality and has embarked on a populist agenda". During the day, protesters blocked the main highway in Jounieh connecting the city to Beirut. Clashes and violence between protesters and security forces occurred over the arrest of activist Michel Chamoun after he had criticized president Michel Aoun on social media. This comes a few days after a new order allowed the right to sue people who insulted the presidency on social media. Violence erupted as Chamoun was being transported from the serail in Jounieh to another detention center. One Internal Security Forces officer was injured in the clashes.

On 22 June, a female activist, Kinda El-Khatib, was charged with the crime of "dealing with the enemy [Israel]" and visiting occupied Palestinian territories, after she was taken from her home in Akkar on 18 June.

On 25 June, protests erupted across Lebanon amidst deteriorating economic conditions in the country, with several protesters shutting down various roads in Lebanon. Several demonstrators reportedly gathered at the Palace of Justice in Beirut, calling for the immediate release of protesters who were detained earlier this week on the allegations of destruction of properties. According to Al Jazeera, the Lebanese pound on Thursday plummeted to a new rate of more than £L7,000 to the dollar on the black market. Following the protests that erupted, President Michel Aoun on Thursday held a national meeting with Lebanon's top politicians, in fear of further escalation of the protests into a civil war.

During a television interview with Al Manar on 28 June, Lebanon's Interior Minister, Mohamed Fahmi, acknowledged killing two people during the 15-year civil war in Lebanon. Fahmi claimed that he was protected by the current President Michel Aoun who was then a senior officer in the army. He also revealed that an incident occurred with the two people he killed, who were part of a very powerful group. The interview with the minister has raised doubts regarding the relationship between Prime Minister Hassan Diab's assumed technocratic government and the current political elite comprising the likes of President Aoun.

On 29 June, two weeks after Henri Chaoul's resignation, the Finance Ministry Director-General and negotiator with the IMF, Alain Bifani, submitted his resignation. At a press conference, Bifani cited the reasons for resigning were that negotiations were at a "dead end" and that the risk level has reached a point where he could no longer stay silent. Bifani continued, "We waited a long time for a chance to achieve serious change and we tried to anticipate what we have reached today. We struggled to avoid the worst, but the forces of darkness and tyranny came together to impede what we did". In a phone call interview with France 24, Bifani blamed the elite interest groups for allowing negotiations to reach a dead-end stating "This is one of the very few cases when the IMF is seen on the side of social justice against political elites in cahoots with private interests, banks, and big depositors – the few who have over $10 million each [in bank deposits] and don't want to contribute to a fair solution." An investigation was launched by Lebanon's security forces into a claimed missile attack that was supposedly fired close to former Prime Minister Saad al-Hariri's convoy on 17 June. A missile reportedly went off 500 metres away from the ex-prime minister's convoy while he was visiting the eastern Bekaa Valley. To note, the report was first published by a foreign news station, the Saudi-owned TV station Al-Hadath, and there is no other reference of the attack.

### July protests

On 3 July, with the continuing collapse of the Lebanese economy and hardship, two men were believed to have killed themselves in Lebanon, according to the Daily Star. A note, a Lebanese flag and a copy of spotless criminal record were discovered on the busy street in Beirut where the first victim, a 61-year-old man from the eastern region of Hermel shot himself. As security workers were taking away the body in a white coffin and clearing the scene, his relative blamed the government for the hard times that brought about the suicide of the victim. However, the second body, a man said to be a driver, was discovered by security forces at his residence near Saida, in southern Lebanon.

On 6 July, following the deepening economic crisis and regular power shortages in Lebanon, protesters took to the streets on Monday, shutting down roads and burning tires in the capital Beirut. In the Sanayeh area of Beirut, protests were also held by drivers outside the headquarters of the Interior Ministry, as they demanded for reduction of fuel prices and other charges. According to Arab News, security forces detained the Lebanese activist Pierre Hashash, further beating up two others among the protesters who came out to demonstrate against the detention of Hashash.

On 10 July, several Lebanese protesters alongside supporters of the Hezbollah group gathered outside the US embassy in Awkar, to protest against Washington's involvement in Lebanon, as well as express support for the Hezbollah group. The protesters threw stones at the security forces outside the embassy and made attempts to remove the barbed wire which was standing between them and the security forces. They also set American flags ablaze and ridiculed the US dollar bills, describing the US as supporters of terrorism. However, the riot police managed to quell the protest by leading the gathering away from the US embassy.

### August protests

On 3 August, Lebanon's Foreign Minister Nassif Hitti reportedly tendered his resignation to the Prime Minister Hassan Diab, describing his fear of the country turning into a failed state due to the government's inability to enact reforms. The appointment of a new minister or caretaker has not been made yet, pending the acceptance of his resignation. According to VOA News, after the previous visit of the French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian to the capital Beirut, he was criticized by Prime Minister Hassan Diab, which Hitti found to be disappointing. The Lebanese Foreign Minister also maintained that Diab's government had not expedited carrying out the reforms that International donors required. However, it is believed that Diab accepted the minister's resignation instantly and has already begun evaluating alternatives for a suitable replacement, his office stated according to France 24. Later in the afternoon on Monday, it was reported that President Michel Aoun's diplomatic adviser Charbel Wahbi, had been named as Hitti's successor.

On 4 August, dozens of Lebanese protesters attempted to force their way into the energy ministry's headquarters in Beirut, following power outages that left several areas in darkness. Security forces with batons managed to break up the crowd which had already made it past a barbed-wire fence. The protesters wanted to prepare a sit-in at the energy ministry, as one protester maintained that they will not vacate the premises until electricity is made available.

#### Beirut explosion protests

On the night of 6 August 2020, protests against the government resumed, following the explosion in Beirut two days prior that killed 218 people and wounded more than 7,000. The protesters gathered near the parliament building calling for the resignation of Lebanese government officials. The health ministry disclosed that despite search and rescue experts taking over the search for remaining survivors, at least 21 people were still missing. The protests turned violent, with officers using tear gas, and several people were wounded. 17 ambulances were dispatched by the Lebanese Red Cross to the protest site in order to assist those who were wounded. That same day, Emmanuel Macron arrived in Beirut. He was the first foreign head of state to do so since the blast. He promised France would donate to relief efforts and urged Lebanon's leaders to implement reforms.

More than 60,000 signed a petition to reintegrate Lebanon as a French colony for 10 years, but Macron rejected the idea and told the Lebanese people that it was up to them to fix their country.

On 8 August 2020, thousands of protesters stormed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Bustros Palace) during demonstrations. Security forces opened fire and clashed with the protesters, wounding more than 238 people, sixty-three of whom were taken to hospital; Saudi news channel Al-Hadath confirmed that a policeman was killed in an accident. Protesters also broke into the Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Energy, and Association of Banks. They also broke into the offices of the ministries of housing and transport, the US News added. A Human Rights Watch investigation documented security forces employing metal pellets in multiple instances against protesters in the August 8 demonstration. All security forces have rejected the claims. In response to the protests and calls for the termination of his government, Prime Minister Diab promised to hold early elections, maintaining that his government would stay for two months until major parties can make a decision.

On 9 August, as the protests entered their second day, the fire reportedly broke out at the entrance of the parliament square, when angry protesters attempted breaking into the building. The broadcast was shown live on Lebanese TV, with security forces using tear gas to disperse hundreds of anti-government protesters gathered outside the building. By Sunday, three ministers stepped down following the explosion. The Lebanese Information Minister Manal Abdel Samad described Diab's government as a failure in terms of meeting the demands of the people of Lebanon. Also, Environment Minister Damianos Kattar lamented that the regime is incompetent and has missed chances for ensuring reforms.

On 11 August, findings by Amnesty International suggested that Lebanese security forces had applied unlawful use of force against protesters, during protests after the explosion in Beirut. Medical documents also showed evidence that protesters were targeted with live rounds and rubber bullets. Medics were also reportedly attacked on the scene, as they were attending to the wounded during the clash.

On 26 August, Human Rights Watch revealed that excessive use of force and live ammunition was applied against anti-government protesters by Lebanese security forces during demonstrations that took place after the Beirut explosion. They also added that some protesters were aimed at directly with tear gas, hitting some in the neck and head. Following these findings, HRW called for an independent investigation into the misconduct carried out by the Lebanese security forces. Lebanese security forces fired metal pellets at least two Lebanese protesters in early September, adding to a growing suspicion that police are employing previously unused tactics that impose serious and possibly deadly injuries.

As Lebanon turned 100 years old on September 1, 2020, riled protesters gathered to demand justice for those impacted by the port blast. They flung rocks and attempted to mount over the walls around Lebanon's heavily guarded Parliament in Beirut as law enforcement agents successfully shot tear gas and rubber bullets in order to scatter the crowd. The protest was the first significant rally since August 8, which left thousands of anti-government protesters injured as they were met with tear gas, rubber bullets, and live ammunition from security forces. During the protests, at least two protesters were said to have been injured as a result of metal pellets used by the Lebanese security forces, according to Al Jazeera.

On 3 September, 30 days after the devastating Beirut explosion, a rescue dog reportedly smelled something that the Chilean rescue thought might possibly be a heartbeat. A piece of equipment was deployed which was said to have picked up a pulse of 18 to 19 beats per minute, though rescuers say that despite the possibility of the pulse meaning someone is alive or in a coma, it could also be just an object producing a signal. Rescue teams dug through the rubble for hours, but unfortunately, they had to temporarily suspend the operation due to the fear that the building could collapse. Separately, the army revealed that four containers with 4.3 tonnes of ammonium nitrate were discovered outside Beirut's seaport, according to the BBC. The military disclosed that army experts had been invited in order to carry out an inspection of the containers with the dangerous chemical. However, the details of the owners or source of the chemicals was not disclosed, the Times of Israel added.

On 10 September, a huge fire reportedly broke out at Beirut's port which was believed to have originated from a warehouse where oil and tires were kept, the Lebanese army disclosed. The cause of the fire was not yet confirmed, CNN added. Although the fire was not yet extinguished, it was brought under control by the Lebanese civil defense fighters, with no casualties reported. However, the head of Lebanon's Red Cross George Kettaneh, stated that some people were experiencing shortness of breath.

On 12 September, the Lebanese Army reportedly clashed with anti-government protesters near the presidential palace in the suburb of Baabda. In an attempt to break up the gathering of protesters, the Lebanese soldiers were said to have fired rubber bullets and live rounds in the air, in order to prevent the protesters from reaching the presidential palace. The protesters criticized the lack of accountability by the authorities to look into the August 4 explosion that devastated the capital, as some of them held up black versions of the Lebanese flag as a sign of mourning those killed in the blast. Anti-government protesters were also reported to have clashed with rival protesters backing President Michel Aoun, Arab News added. Several Lebanese soldiers were said to have been wounded as a result of stones and tree branches thrown at them by some protesters.

On 15 September, following Beirut's August 4 explosion, a third fire erupted again in a Zaha Hadid-designed shopping centre in Beirut. Firefighters were able to bring the situation under control, as they managed to extinguish the flames, according to the Lebanese Civil Defense. The cause of the fire is yet to be determined, Al Jazeera added. So far, no casualties have been reported during the incident.

On 27 September 2020, Gebran Bassil's party said he was infected with a "mild" case of COVID-19 as cases continued to surge throughout Lebanon.

On 9 October 2020, a fuel tanker exploded, leaving at least four people dead and twenty injured. The blast occurred after the tank caught fire in the Tariq-al-Jdide district.

On 1 February 2021, fresh evidence revealed by Amnesty International suggested that the Lebanese security forces applied unlawful use of force and excessive tear gas to disperse protesters during the 2020 Beirut explosion protests in Lebanon.

#### Resignations

As of August 10 Lebanon's Prime Minister Hassan Diab and his cabinet resigned, and became interim prime minister until a new government is formed. Diab made the announcement while he was delivering a speech on Monday evening, blaming the country's ruling class for hindering reform plans. Following his speech, he proceeded to the presidential palace where President Michel Aoun approved the resignation of his cabinet. Despite the stepping down of Diab's government, Lebanese protesters have maintained that they would still not stop the demonstrations, VOA News reported.

On 31 August, Mustapha Adib, Lebanon's ambassador to Germany since 2013 was named as the new Prime Minister of Lebanon. His nomination came just the same day as the French President Emmanuel Macron's second planned visit to Lebanon within a month, to discuss various needs for reform. According to Lebanon's sectarian-based power-sharing system, Adib being a Sunni Muslim, makes him qualified to become Lebanon's PM. Adib's name was said to have emerged following a meeting between an influential group of previous PMs of Lebanon on Sunday, according to Al Jazeera.

After Mustapha Adib's nomination as new Prime Minister-designate, he urged for the formation of a new government and the implementation of immediate reforms, in order to reach an understanding with the IMF. The 48-year-old little-known diplomat was able to acquire 90 votes out of the 128-member parliament of legislators. 17 MPs were said to have voted for other candidates, with about a dozen other MPs either failing to be present or voting for no one, Al Jazeera added.

On Monday also, French President Emmanuel Macron visited Lebanon for the second time since the August 4 explosion which destroyed almost half of Beirut. Upon Macron's arrival at the Beirut International airport, he urged for the immediate establishment of a new cabinet. According to Macron, after his meeting with Lebanese leaders on Tuesday, they vowed to set up a new government within two weeks.

On 26 September, Mustapha Adib stepped down after failing to form a cabinet. His decision to step aside came after conducting a meeting with President Michel Aoun. Despite Adib's resignation, President Aoun has maintained that he remains obligated to ensure that Macron's initiative is still on course. According to DW, Adib particularly encountered a deadlock while nominating who would occupy the position of Finance Minister, as Lebanon's main Shiite groups, Hezbollah and Amal, both want to keep the position.

Following Mustapha Adib's resignation, French President Emmanuel Macron on 27 September, blamed Lebanon's leaders for being unable to establish a new government and described their failure as a betrayal. He added that he was embarrassed with the Lebanese political leaders during his news conference in Paris, stating that they had no regard for the commitments dedicated to France and the entire international community. He has also issued a warning to the Shiite group Hezbollah, which was held responsible for delaying the process of forming a new government, saying that the Iran-backed movement should not overestimate its powers. While ruling out the establishment of sanctions, the French President said he would allocate another four to six more weeks for Lebanon's political class to implement France's plans for economic and political reform.

### October protests

On 17 October 2020, protesters gathered in Beirut and across Lebanon to celebrate the revolution's first anniversary. Roads were blocked as well as many gatherings amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The protesters waved the Lebanese flags, as they gathered in the epicenter of last year's rallies, Martyrs' Square. Also, dozens of protesters were said to have marched past the central bank, including the parliament building, after which they gathered near the port that was destroyed in the August 4 explosion. Despite arguing to proceed with the revolutionary movement, the Lebanese protesters have demanded President Michel Aoun step aside. However, during Aoun's address to the public, he maintained that he was not going to step down, and promised to see to the creation of a new cabinet.

On 19 October 2020, the General Director of the General Directorate of General Security Abbas Ibrahim tested positive for COVID-19 while in the United States. The Wall Street Journal reported that he had met national security adviser Robert C. O'Brien at the White House the week before to discuss American citizens held in Syria. The General Directorate of General Security said in a tweet that he was in good health. On 23 October 2020, he returned to Beirut.

On 22 October, Hariri was appointed Lebanon's Prime Minister. His appointment came after gaining the support of the majority of members of the parliament who met with President Aoun on Thursday, Reuters reported.

### December

Mass student protests hit Lebanon as university students were angry about tuition payments and student loan and tuition hikes. They lit fires and came in their thousands in Beirut and a sea of flags was seen. Riot police clashed with protesters demanding the end of the government. Soon, they fired tear gas and water cannon as protesters threw eggs and stones. Arrests were made and stone throwing ended. Peaceful demonstrations continued after the clashes. There are no immediate reports of casualties in the unrest so far, according to Al Jazeera.


## 2021 protests

### January protests

On 25 January, following the extension of a nationwide total lockdown by two weeks by the Lebanese authorities to curb the rising number of COVID-19 cases, angry protesters took to the streets, which led to heavy clashes with security forces. In Lebanon's northern city of Tripoli, eight people were reportedly wounded during the clashes, including three members of the Internal Security Forces.

On 26 January, as the anti-lockdown protests entered their second night, protesters threw rocks and broken glasses at army personnel, who responded with rubber bullets and tear gas. Tripoli's main square was shut down by the demonstrators, a military vehicle was also set ablaze, as well as targeting government buildings. According to the Lebanese Red Cross, the number of wounded people in Tripoli had reached at least 45 people, during the overnight clashes between the security forces and angry protesters. On Tuesday, the daily recorded number of COVID-19 deaths in Lebanon was said to have hit a new record with the number reaching 73, according to the ABC News.

On 27 January, the Lebanese caretaker Prime Minister Hassan Diab called on the protesters to engage in peaceful demonstrations and avoid the destruction of government facilities, as well as clashing with security forces. According to Al Jazeera, protesters rallied for their third consecutive night in Tripoli as it turned into riots. Police accordingly fired Live ammunition to disperse protesters. Many people were left wounded in the clashes. Reports have shown that one protester Omar Tayba, 29, was killed as a result of a bullet wound, making him the first fatality of the anti-lockdown protests.

On 28 January, following the death of one protester in the northern city of Tripoli, protesters returned to the city's main square, despite a 24-hour curfew being imposed by the Lebanese authorities in an attempt to tackle the rise in COVID-19 fatalities. So far, the number of injured people were said to have reached at least 220 people, alongside 26 police officers, according to Deutsche Welle.

On 31 January, according to the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF), at least 70 children were wounded in Lebanon's northern city of Tripoli since the beginning of anti-lockdown protests last week. The organization called on the Lebanese security forces, including the protesters, to make sure that children are protected, by preventing their participation in all acts of violence.

### March 2021

On 2 March 2021, the Lebanese pound hit a new record against the dollar at L.L.10.000 to one dollar. Some areas in Lebanon have been reported to be experiencing power cuts for more than 12 hours a day because of the delay in the provision of fuel shipments, which has been caused by a shortage of hard currency. During the protests, protesters burnt tires and shut down several roads. Northern Tripoli's Abdul Hamid Karami Square was also closed by protesters, including Zahle Square in central Lebanon.

On 4 March, protesters returned to the streets, criticizing their leaders for being unable to create a new government. Protesters in Furn al-Shebak and Jal el Dib blocked main roads connecting Beirut to other cities by burning tires.

On 6 March, caretaker Prime Minister Hassan Diab threatened to stop performing his duties in an attempt to mount pressure on the Lebanese politicians to establish a new government. He also called on them to set aside their differences and create a new government, in order to prevent the country from rapidly escalating into more violence. On the same day, a small gathering of protesters were reported to have gathered outside the central bank in Beirut, requesting for their deposits to be made accessible. Subsequently, the protesters were said to have walked to the parliament building to express their agitations.

On 8 March, protesters continued to burn tires to shut down main roads, managing to shut down roads from Jal el-Dib, al-Dawra, and Zouk, to Beirut. Amnesty International called on the Lebanese authorities to immediately cease charging protesters and activists with terrorism-related accusations. Furthermore, Lebanon's Attorney General Judge Ghassan Oweidat instructed the country's top security forces and officials, including the Internal Security Forces (ISF) to go after perpetrators behind illicit foreign currency speculation and alteration with the Lebanese currency.

On Monday also, following several days of protests and road blockades in the streets of Lebanon, President Michel Aoun called on security forces to clear out the roadblocks set up by protesters. On the other hand, the Lebanese army chief General Joseph Aoun has emphasized the right to peaceful protest, as he cautioned the military personnel to avoid being dragged into the country's political stalemate.

On 10 March, following calls made by President Aoun to clear out obstructions, the Lebanese army disclosed that they had commenced the clearing out of the roadblocks which had been set up for several days by the Lebanese protesters.

On March 12, more than 1000 protesters started from the Interior Ministry in Hamra and headed towards the Parliament. This protest was considered as the largest in weeks.

On 13 March, the Lebanese currency reportedly hit a new record slide amid weeks of protests, with a black market rate of £L12,500 to the US dollar. Following the currency's decline, stores were said to have suspended selling goods, while businesses decided to shut down their doors, according to Arab News. A small group of protesters gathered near the parliament building in the afternoon, hurling stones at security forces who responded with tear gas, in an attempt to break up the crowd. Some demonstrators also attempted to force their way in by trying to penetrate a metal gate connecting to the legislature.

After the anger among the Lebanese, President Michel Aoun and Prime minister-designate Saad Hariri held immediate talks in the presidential palace. After that, on March 17, the President told Hariri that he should form a government immediately and that if he isunable to do so "he should make way for those who are". Aoun also maintained that inaction was no longer a choice for the PM-designate Hariri, as he must choose between stepping down or forming a government.

On March 20, on the eve of Mother's Day, a group of women protested and went from Bechara Al Khoury towards Beirut and the port shouting and crying due to the crisis in the country.

On March 22, and after several meetings between Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri and President Aoun, Hariri said that the demands of the President were "unacceptable", therefore Lebanon witnessed a failure to form a new government which will worsen the crisis. According to Hariri, President Aoun presented him with a line-up granting his team a third of all cabinet seats, which would enable them to have veto power over decision making in the Lebanese government. Harir was said to have been criticized by Aoun for disclosing his proposed government with the media, because the distribution of the ministries was unjust which was his reason for not agreeing to the line-up, according to Al Jazeera. After the meeting which only lasted for just 35 minutes, another date for a new meeting between Hariri and Aoun could not be confirmed.

On 23 March, central streets in Beirut were closed by protesters, following the outcome of the political meeting between the Lebanese prime minister-designate Saad Hariri and President Michel Aoun.

On March 28, the Lebanese Communist Party arranged a protest in the capital Beirut amid a worsening economic and living situation in Lebanon. Despite tight security, the protesters gathered in front of the Central Bank, then moved to the Government Palace while holding banners demanding various basic social amenities.

On March 29, the parliament approved $200 million in emergency funding to avoid the national power cut that might hit the country by the end of March. Former energy minister and member of parliament, Cesar Abi Khalil maintained that it is expected to make electricity sufficient for about two months.

On March 30, families of students studying abroad protested against Lebanese banks and tried to raid a closed bank while staff worked inside. Their protest was because their children were expelled from their universities because the parents couldn't send them money due to the rise of the exchange rate of the dollar.

Separately, a report by Human Rights Watch (HRW) suggested that during the lockdown and worsening economy protests in Lebanon's Tripoli, demonstrators were allegedly tortured by the Lebanese military intelligence. Apart from the torture of detainees, the HRW also added that others were forcefully abducted by the military.

### April 2021

In April 2021, The US undersecretary of state for political affairs, David Hale, visited Lebanon and met President Michel Aoun. After the meeting, Hale issued a warning against "those who continue to obstruct progress on the reform agenda."

### May 2021

On 14 May, Lebanese protesters reportedly gathered near the border fence with Israel in order to show support for Palestinians during its present conflict with Israel. As the angry demonstrators were trying to cross the border fence, a Lebanese protester was said to have been shot and killed as a result of shelling by Israeli security forces. According to Al-Monitor, two other Lebanese protesters were also wounded. President Michel Aoun criticized the use of force applied by the Israeli forces when they started firing at the group of protesters.

### June 2021

On 21 June, protesters took to the streets, following newly adopted measures to tackle fuel smuggling into Syria. The protesters burnt tires and metal bars, shutting down a highway linking Lebanon and Syria, Alarabiya news reported. Security forces were said to have stopped gasoline smugglers from driving through the legitimate crossing, which led to the blockage of the Masnaa crossing by the smugglers. In Lebanon's eastern Bekaa region, the customs authorities stated that it would impose the use of permits for vehicles going into Syria, in an attempt to curb fuel smuggling. However, the protesters blocking the highway are urging for the permit to either be binding on everyone going to Syria or canceled completely.

On 26 June, protesters clashed with security forces in Lebanon's Tripoli and other cities, as the Lebanese currency plunges to a record low. In Tripoli, several protesters were reportedly wounded during the clashes. The Lebanese army however maintained that 10 soldiers were wounded after protesters hurled stones at troops and also threw stun grenades at them.

On 28 June, several roads were shut down by the Lebanese protesters, ahead of the fuel prices hike that is expected to be announced by the energy ministry on 29 June.

On 29 June, fuel prices were hiked by more than 35 percent by the Lebanese energy ministry, following the cutting down of subsidies last week. The delay by the Lebanese central bank in opening credit lines to fund fuel imports, was described by fuel importers as the reason behind the crisis, the Arab News added.

On 30 June, the situation in the northern city of Tripoli worsened, with a child dying who was on oxygen, as a result of power cuts and shortage of diesel for the generators. Following the use of live ammunition, armored vehicles had to be deployed to the streets by the Lebanese Army, in order to restore calm to the city.

### July 2021

On 9 July, protests were held in Lebanon's capital Beirut, as families of victims of the 2020 Beirut explosion mount pressure on parliament to punish officials. Prior to the protest, caretaker Interior Minister Mohammed Fahmi, denied a request by the judge investigating the explosion to question the head of the General Security Agency, Maj.-Gen. Abbas Ibrahim, according to the JPost. The protesters demanded the immunity of three legislators be lifted, in line with the request made by the judge looking into the blast at the Beirut port. The Lebanese army and parliamentary guards were said to have clashed with some of the families of victims who tried to force their way into the headquarters of Speaker Nabih Berri in Beirut.

On 15 July, Lebanon's Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri, reportedly stepped aside, after a brief meeting the Lebanese President Michel Aoun at Baabda Palace, according to Al Jazeera. Hariri described his reason for stepping down due to failure to reach an agreement with Aoun after their 20-minute meeting. He also disclosed to reporters that President Aoun had rejected the cabinet selection he had submitted in less than 24 hours. Following the news of Hariri's resignation, some protesters, mostly Hariri's, were said to have shut down roads in the capital Beirut, including the burning of tires, as they denounced the worsening economic situation.

On 25 July, Lebanese billionaire and former PM Najib Mikati received backing from Lebanese Sunni leaders to become Lebanon's prime minister-designate. Mikati also received support from Speaker Nabih Berri, Amal Movement, with Hezbollah's backing expected to follow.

On 26 July, in an effort to appointing a new PM-designated, President Michel Aoun began discussions with the country's parliamentary bloc earlier in the morning, at the Baabda Palace. On Monday also, the Lebanese Tycoon Najib Mikati, was said to have met with the Lebanese President Michel Aoun, and he is also expected to gain a majority of support from the parliamentary bloc.

Later on Monday, Najib Mikati was confirmed by the Lebanese parliament as Lebanon's new prime minister-designate. During the parliamentary consultation with the Lebanese president, the two-time prime minister was said to have secured a majority of the votes from MPs. The US and France also welcomed the new appointment made by the Lebanese government, the Deutsche Welle added. Following Mikati's appointment, he urged for unity, in order to start reviving the country's crippling economy.

### August 2021

On 4 August, dozens of Lebanese rallied in the capital Beirut, to mark the first anniversary of the 2020 Beirut explosion. At least six people were reported to have been injured, as protesters clashed with security forces near the parliament. Just a day before the anniversary protests, Human Rights Watch (HRW), blamed the Lebanese authorities for hindering the investigation into the blast, according to the TRT World.

Meanwhile, during an international donor conference that was held on the first anniversary of the massive Beirut port explosion, French President Emmanuel Macron blamed Lebanese politicians for the economic woe in Lebanon. Macron also called for support, while pointing out that the COVID-19 pandemic has left the Lebanese people in a more dire condition, including the lack of medicines.

On 9 August, three men were killed in Lebanon, amid tensions over fuel shortages. According to a statement by the Lebanese army, one of the men was killed in northern Lebanon's Dinniyeh region during a dispute over fuel, while the two others were killed in Tripoli. In Tripoli, reports suggested that the dispute escalated to the extent of throwing a hand grenade, including the exchange of fire, Al Jazeera added.

On 12 August, angry Lebanese protesters shut down roads across Lebanon, following the central bank's move to end fuel subsidies. One protester was seriously wounded in the southern village of Zahrani, after being run over by a motorist, according to ABC News.

On 15 August, a fuel tanker exploded in northern Lebanon's Akkar District, killing 20 people and wounding at least 79 people more. Reports from the National News Agency suggested that the explosion was a result of a fuel container blowing up, that was seized by the army. More than 200 people were believed to have been at the scene when the incident took place. According to Deutsche Welle, the Lebanese Health Minister Hamad Hassan has stated that the government would sponsor the medical treatment of those affected by the explosion. Also, Kuwait has offered to sponsor the treatment for the burn victims of the blast, the Kuwait Red Crescent Society (KRCS) stated.

### September 2021

On 16 September, an arrest warrant was issued for the former public works minister Youssef Finianos, by the leading judge investigating the 2020 Beirut explosion. According to Al Jazeera, the warrant was issued after Finianos failed to show up for questioning. The leading judge Tarek Bitar also charged three former top government officials alongside Finianos, with endangerment, which saw to the deaths of over 200 people in the Beirut blast.

Meanwhile, the EU has demanded the establishment of a resolution within the UN framework, to look into the devastating Beirut Port blast. During a vote, 571 out of 681 members of the European Parliament supported the resolution which is aimed at approving sanctions on Lebanese officials who were involved in corruption or were responsible for hindering the investigation into the blast. The EU also urged for humanitarian aid to be distributed directly to the people requiring assistance, considering the extreme mishandling of relief funds provided to Lebanon in the past.

### October Tayouneh clashes

On October 14, 2021, a protest in Beirut, led by the Amal Movement, Hezbollah and the Marada Movement, demanded the resignation of the lead judge probing the 2020 Beirut port's explosion. As the protest went on and the situation got more violent when protesters began to shout sectarian slogans, destroy property and harass passersby in the region of Tayouneh, snipers from roofs started shooting against the protestors in the streets, giving start to the clashes between Shia militants and armed civilians that killed 7 people and wounded 32 more. Hezbollah accused the Lebanese Forces, a Christian political group; the group denied the accusation. The gunfight included assault rifles and rocket-propelled grenades. Some of the deceased include a militant who had previously fought in Syria under Hezbollah.


## 2022

### Riad Salemeh trials

In February 2022, a subpoena was issued by Judge Ghada Aoun after Riad Salameh failed to show up to court for questioning, while his whereabouts were unknown after a raid in his office and 2 homes, as part of an investigation for alleged misconduct and corruption. This sparked controversy with another security agency that was accused of protecting him from trial. Later in March 21, Salameh along with his brother Raja were charged for illicit enrichment by Ghassan Oueidat but also failed to attend for questioning. His brother, Raja Salameh spent a month in detention but was released on May 22 while on a record bail of 100 billion LBP.

On June 21, 2022, his home was raided again by Lebanese security forces.
