---
title: "A Song of Ice and Fire (part 1/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Song_of_Ice_and_Fire
domain: northwestern-university
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: northwestern university
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 1/2
---

# *A Song of Ice and Fire*

***A Song of Ice and Fire*** is a series of high fantasy novels by the American author George R. R. Martin. Martin began writing the first volume, *A Game of Thrones*, in 1991, and published it in 1996. Martin, who originally envisioned the series as a trilogy, has released five out of seven planned volumes. The most recent entry in the series, *A Dance with Dragons*, was published in 2011. Since then, Martin is working on the sixth novel, titled *The Winds of Winter*. A seventh novel, *A Dream of Spring*, is planned to follow.

*A Song of Ice and Fire* depicts a violent world dominated by political realism. What little supernatural power exists is confined to the margins of the known world. Moral ambiguity pervades the books, and many of the storylines frequently raise questions concerning loyalty, pride, human sexuality, piety, and the morality of violence. The story unfolds through an alternating set of subjective points of view, the success or survival of any of which is never assured. Each chapter is told from a limited third-person perspective, drawn from a group of characters that expands from nine in the first novel to 31 by the fifth.

The novels are set on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos (the world as a whole does not have an established name). Martin's stated inspirations for the series include many supposed historic events. The work as a whole consists of three interwoven plots: a dynastic war among several families for control of Westeros, the ambition of the surviving members of the dethroned Targaryen dynasty to return from their exile in Essos and reassume the Iron Throne, and the growing threat posed by the powerful supernatural Others from the northernmost region of Westeros.

As of 2026, more than 100 million copies in 47 languages had been sold. The fourth and fifth volumes reached the top of the *New York Times* Best Seller lists when published in 2005 and 2011 respectively. Among the many derived works are several prequel novellas, three television series, a comic book adaptation, and several card, board, and video games. The series has received critical acclaim for its world-building, characters, and narrative.


## Plot synopsis

*A Song of Ice and Fire* takes place in a fictional world in which seasons often last for years and can end unpredictably. Before the events of the first novel, the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros were united under the Targaryen dynasty, establishing military supremacy through their control of dragons. The Targaryens ruled for nearly three hundred years, continuing beyond the extinction of the dragons. Their dynasty eventually ended with a rebellion led by Lord Robert Baratheon, in which Aerys II "the Mad King" Targaryen was killed and Robert proclaimed king of the Seven Kingdoms. At the beginning of *A Game of Thrones*, 15 years have passed since Robert's rebellion, with a nine-year-long summer nearing its end.

The principal story chronicles the power struggle for the Iron Throne among the great Houses of Westeros following the death of King Robert in *A Game of Thrones*. Robert's heir apparent, the 13-year-old Joffrey, is immediately proclaimed king through the machinations of his mother, Queen Cersei Lannister. When Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark — Robert's closest friend and chief advisor — discovers that Joffrey and his siblings are the product of incest between Cersei and her twin brother Ser Jaime Lannister, Eddard attempts to unseat Joffrey, but is betrayed and executed for treason. In response, Robert's younger brothers Stannis and Renly lay separate claims to the throne. During this period of instability, two of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros attempt to become independent from the Iron Throne: Eddard's eldest son Robb is proclaimed King in the North, while Lord Balon Greyjoy desires to recover the independence of his kingdom, the Iron Islands. The so-called "War of the Five Kings" is in full progress by the middle of the second book, *A Clash of Kings*. This story is told principally through the perspectives of Eddard's wife Catelyn, their children Sansa, Arya, and Bran, and Jaime and Cersei's younger brother Tyrion Lannister, with more point-of-view characters added as the novels continue.

The second storyline stems from the far north of Westeros, where an 8,000-year-old wall of ice, simply called "the Wall", defends the Seven Kingdoms from supernatural creatures known as the Others. The Wall's sentinels, the Sworn Brotherhood of the Night's Watch, also protect the realm from incursions by the "wildlings" or "Free Folk", a number of human tribes living on the north side of the Wall. The story of The Night's Watch is told primarily through the point of view of Jon Snow, Lord Eddard Stark's bastard son. Jon follows in the footsteps of his paternal uncle Benjen Stark and joins the Watch at a young age, rising quickly through the ranks. He eventually becomes Lord Commander of the Night's Watch. In the third volume, *A Storm of Swords*, the Night's Watch storyline becomes increasingly entangled with the War of the Five Kings when King Stannis Baratheon arrives at the Wall.

The third storyline follows Daenerys Targaryen, daughter of Aerys II. On the continent of Essos, east of Westeros across the Narrow Sea, Daenerys is married off by her elder brother Viserys to a powerful warlord of the nomadic Dothraki. Over the course of her story, Daenerys slowly becomes an independent and intelligent ruler in her own right. Her rise to power is aided by the historic birth of three dragons, hatched from eggs given to her as wedding gifts. The three dragons soon become not only a symbol of her bloodline and her claim to the throne but also devastating weapons of war, which help her in the conquest of Slaver's Bay. The later books follow her ongoing conflict with the region's city-states, in which she aims to consolidate power, disrupt the Essosi slave trade, and gather support for her ambitions to reclaim Westeros.


## Publishing history

Books in the *A Song of Ice and Fire* series are first published in hardcover and are later re-released as paperback editions. In the UK, Harper Voyager publishes special slipcased editions. The series has also been translated into more than 30 languages. All page totals given below are for the US first editions.

| # | Title | Pages | Chapters | Words | Audio | US release |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | *A Game of Thrones* | 694 | 73 | 292,727 | 33 h 53 min | August 1996 |
| 2 | *A Clash of Kings* | 768 | 70 | 318,903 | 37 h 17 min | February 1999 |
| 3 | *A Storm of Swords* | 973 | 82 | 414,604 | 47 h 37 min | November 2000 |
| 4 | *A Feast for Crows* | 753 | 46 | 295,032 | 31 h 10 min | November 2005 |
| 5 | *A Dance with Dragons* | 1056 | 73 | 414,788 | 48 h 56 min | July 2011 |
| 6 | *The Winds of Winter* | *Forthcoming* |   |   |   |   |
| 7 | *A Dream of Spring* | *Forthcoming* |   |   |   |   |
| Total | 4,244 | 344 | 1,736,054 | 198 h 53 min | 1996–present |   |

### First three novels (1991–2000)

George R. R. Martin was already a successful fantasy and sci-fi author and TV writer before writing his *A Song of Ice and Fire* book series. Martin had his first short story published in 1971 and his first novel in 1977. By the mid-1990s, he had won three Hugo Awards, two Nebula Awards, and other awards for his short fiction. Although his early books were well-received within the fantasy fiction community, his readership remained relatively small and Martin took on jobs as a writer in Hollywood in the mid-1980s. He worked principally on the revival of *The Twilight Zone* throughout 1986 and on *Beauty and the Beast* until 1990, but he also developed his own TV pilots and wrote feature film scripts. He grew frustrated that his pilots and screenplays were not getting made and that TV-related production limitations like budgets and episode lengths were forcing him to cut characters and trim battle scenes. This pushed Martin back towards writing books, where he did not have to worry about compromising the size of his imagination. Admiring the works of J. R. R. Tolkien in his childhood, he wanted to write an epic fantasy, though he did not have any specific ideas.

When Martin was between Hollywood projects in the summer of 1991, he started writing a new science fiction novel called *Avalon*. After three chapters, he had a vivid idea of a boy seeing a man's beheading and finding direwolves in the snow, which would eventually become the first non-prologue chapter of *A Game of Thrones*. Putting *Avalon* aside, Martin finished this chapter in a few days and grew certain that it was part of a longer story. After a few more chapters, Martin perceived his new book as a fantasy story and started making maps and genealogies. However, the writing of this book was interrupted for a few years when Martin returned to Hollywood to produce his TV series *Doorways* that ABC had ordered but ultimately never aired.

> "The first scene...chapter one of the first book, the chapter where they find the direwolf pups...just came to me out of nowhere. I was...at work on a different novel, and suddenly I saw that scene. It didn't belong in the novel I was writing, but it came to me so vividly that I had to sit down and write it, and by the time I did, it led to a second chapter, and the second chapter was the Catelyn chapter where Ned has just come back."

—

George R. R. Martin in 2014

In 1994, Martin gave his agent, Kirby McCauley, the first 200 pages and a two-page story projection as part of a planned trilogy with the novels *A Dance with Dragons* and *The Winds of Winter* intended to follow. When Martin had still not reached the novel's end at 1,400 manuscript pages, he felt that the series needed to be four and eventually six books long, which he imagined as two linked trilogies of one long story. Martin chose *A Song of Ice and Fire* as the overall series title: Martin saw the struggle of the cold Others and the fiery dragons as one possible meaning for "Ice and Fire", whereas the word "song" had previously appeared in Martin's book titles *A Song for Lya* and *Songs the Dead Men Sing*, stemming from his obsessions with songs. Martin also named Robert Frost's 1920 poem "Fire and Ice" and cultural associations such as passion versus betrayal as possible influences for the series' title.

The revised finished manuscript for *A Game of Thrones* was 1,088 pages long (without the appendices), with the publication following in August 1996. *The Wheel of Time*author Robert Jordan had written a short endorsement for the cover that was influential in ensuring the book's and hence series' early success with fantasy readers. *Blood of the Dragon*, a pre-release sample novella drawn from Daenerys's chapters, went on to win the 1997 Hugo Award for Best Novella. The first book was marketed as part of the "*Song of Ice and Fire* trilogy" in 1996, but by the second book's release, the "trilogy" suffix had been dropped and the series was retitled to *A Song of Ice and Fire*.

The 300 pages removed from the *Game of Thrones* manuscript served as the opening of the second book, entitled *A Clash of Kings*. It was released in February 1999 in the United States, with a manuscript length (without appendices) of 1,184 pages. *A Clash of Kings* was the first book of the *Song of Ice and Fire* series to make the best-seller lists, reaching 13 on *The New York Times* Best Seller list in 1999. After the success of *The Lord of the Rings* films, Martin received his first inquiries to the rights of the *Song of Ice and Fire* series from various producers and filmmakers.

Martin was several months late turning in the third book, *A Storm of Swords*. The last chapter he had written was about the "Red Wedding", a pivotal scene notable for its violence (see Themes: Violence and death). *A Storm of Swords* was 1,521 pages in manuscript (without appendices), causing problems for many of Martin's publishers around the world. Bantam Books published *A Storm of Swords* in a single volume in the United States in November 2000, whereas some other-language editions were divided into two, three, or even four volumes. *A Storm of Swords* debuted at number 12 in the *New York Times* bestseller list.

### Bridging the timeline gap (2000–2011)

After *A Game of Thrones*, *A Clash of Kings*, and *A Storm of Swords*, Martin originally intended to write three more books. The fourth book, tentatively titled *A Dance with Dragons*, was to focus on Daenerys Targaryen's return to Westeros and the associated conflicts. Martin wanted to set this story five years after *A Storm of Swords* so that the younger characters could grow older and the dragons could grow larger. Agreeing with his publishers early on that the new book should be shorter than *A Storm of Swords*, Martin set out to write the novel closer in length to *A Clash of Kings*. A long prologue was to establish what had happened in the meantime, initially just as one chapter of Aeron Damphair on the Iron Islands at the Kingsmoot. Since the events on the Iron Islands were to have an impact in the book and could not be told with existing POV characters, Martin eventually introduced three new viewpoints.

In 2001, Martin was still optimistic that the fourth installment might be released in the last quarter of 2002. However, the five-year gap did not work for all characters during writing. On one hand, Martin was unsatisfied with covering the events during the gap solely through flashbacks and internal retrospection. On the other hand, it was implausible to have nothing happen for five years. After working on the book for about a year, Martin realized he needed an additional interim book, which he called *A Feast for Crows*. The book would pick up the story immediately after the third book, and Martin scrapped the idea of a five-year gap. The material of the written 250-page prologue was mixed in as new viewpoint characters from Dorne and the Iron Islands. These expanded storylines and the resulting story interactions complicated the plot for Martin.

The manuscript length of *A Feast for Crows* eventually surpassed *A Storm of Swords*. Martin was reluctant to make the necessary deep cuts to get the book down to publishable length, as that would have compromised the story he had in mind. Printing the book in "microtype on onion skin paper and giving each reader a magnifying glass" was also not an option for him. On the other hand, Martin rejected the publishers' idea of splitting the narrative chronologically into *A Feast for Crows*, Parts One and Two. Being already late with the book, Martin had not even started writing all characters' stories, and also objected to ending the first book without any resolution for its many viewpoint characters as in previous books.

With the characters spread out across the world, a friend suggested that Martin divide the story geographically into two volumes, of which *A Feast for Crows* would be the first. This approach would give Martin the room to complete his commenced story arcs as he had originally intended, which he still felt was the best approach years later. Martin moved the unfinished characters' stories set in the east (Essos) and north (Winterfell and the Wall) into the next book, *A Dance with Dragons*, and left *A Feast for Crows* to cover the events in King's Landing, the Riverlands, Dorne, and the Iron Islands. Both books begin immediately after the end of *A Storm of Swords*, running in parallel instead of sequentially, and involve different casts of characters with only little overlap. Martin split Arya's chapters into both books after having already moved the three other most popular characters (Jon Snow, Tyrion, and Daenerys) into *A Dance with Dragons*.

Upon its release in October 2005 in the UK and November 2005 in the US, *A Feast for Crows* went straight to the top of *The New York Times* bestseller list. Among the positive reviewers was Lev Grossman of *Time*, who dubbed Martin "the American Tolkien". However, fans and critics alike were disappointed with the story split that left the fates of several popular characters unresolved after *A Storm of Swords*' cliffhanger ending. With *A Dance with Dragons* said to be half-finished, Martin mentioned in the epilogue of *A Feast for Crows* that the next volume would be released by the next year. However, planned release dates were repeatedly pushed back. Meanwhile, HBO acquired the rights to turn *A Song of Ice and Fire* into a fantasy drama series in 2007 and aired the first of ten episodes covering *A Game of Thrones* in April 2011.

With around 1600 pages in manuscript length, *A Dance with Dragons* was eventually published in July 2011 after six years of writing, longer in page count and writing time than any of the preceding four novels. The story of *A Dance with Dragons* catches up with and goes beyond *A Feast for Crows* around two-thirds into the book, but nevertheless covers less story than Martin had intended, omitting at least one planned large battle sequence and leaving several character threads ending in cliffhangers. Martin attributed the delay mainly to his untangling "the Meereenese knot", which the interviewer understood as "making the chronology and characters mesh up as various threads converged on [Daenerys]". Martin also acknowledged spending too much time on rewriting and perfecting the story, but soundly rejected the theories of some of his critics that he had lost interest in the series or would bide his time to make more money.

### Planned novels and future (2011–present)

Martin believed in 2012 the last two volumes of the series would be large books of 1500 manuscript pages each. The sixth book will be called *The Winds of Winter*, taking the title of the last book of the originally planned trilogy. Displeased with the provisional title *A Time for Wolves* for the final volume, Martin ultimately chose *A Dream of Spring* as the title for the seventh book in 2006. Martin said in March 2012 that the final two novels will take readers farther north than any of the previous books, and that the Others will appear. Martin indicated he would not permit another writer to finish the book series.

#### *The Winds of Winter*

*The Winds of Winter* is to resolve the cliffhangers from *A Dance with Dragons* early on and "will open with the two big battles that [the fifth book] was building up to, the Battle in the Ice and the Battle [...] of Slaver's Bay. And then take it from there." By the middle of 2010, Martin had already finished five chapters of *The Winds of Winter* from the viewpoints of Sansa Stark, Arya Stark, Arianne Martell, and Aeron Greyjoy, coming to around 100 completed pages. After the publication of *A Dance with Dragons* in 2011, Martin spent the remainder of the year on book tours, conventions, and continued working on his *The World of Ice & Fire* companion guide and a new *Tales of Dunk and Egg* novella. In December 2011, Martin posted a chapter from *The Winds of Winter* from the viewpoint of Theon Greyjoy; several other chapters have been made public since. Four hundred pages of the sixth novel had been written as of October 2012, although Martin considered only 200 as "really finished"; the rest needed revising. During the Guadalajara International Book Fair in Mexico in early December 2016, Martin offered the following hint as to the tone of this book: "There are a lot of dark chapters right now ... I've been telling you for 20 years that winter was coming. Winter is the time when things die, and cold and ice and darkness fill the world, so this is not going to be the happy feel-good that people may be hoping for. Some of the characters [are] in very dark places." Martin did not intend to separate the characters geographically again.

In 2011, Martin gave three years as a realistic estimate for finishing the sixth book at a good pace, but said ultimately the book "will be done when it's done", acknowledging that his publication estimates had been too optimistic in the past. In 2015 there were indications that the book would be published before the sixth season of the HBO show but in early January 2016 Martin confirmed that he had not met an end-of-year deadline that he had established with his publisher for release of the book before the sixth season. He also revealed there had been a previous deadline of October 2015 that he had considered achievable in May 2015, and that in September 2015 he had still considered the end-of-year deadline achievable. He further confirmed that some of the plot of the book might be revealed in the then-upcoming sixth season of *Game of Thrones*. In February 2016, Martin stated that he dropped all his editing projects except for *Wild Cards*, and that he would not be writing any teleplays, screenplays, short stories, introductions or forewords before delivering *The Winds of Winter*. In March 2020, Martin stated that he was writing *The Winds of Winter* every day, and in June he hoped to be done with it in 2021. In October 2022, Martin said that he had written approximately three quarters of the book. estimating that he had written approximately 1,100 to 1,200 pages, and had roughly 400 to 500 pages left. He gave a similar estimate in November 2023, saying that he was "struggling" with the manuscript.

#### *A Dream of Spring*

Martin is not firm about ending the series with the seventh novel. With his stated goal of telling the story from beginning to end, he will not truncate the story to fit into an arbitrary number of volumes. He knows the ending in broad strokes as well as the future of the main characters, and plans to finish the series with bittersweet elements where not everyone will live happily ever after. Martin hopes to write an ending similar to *The Lord of the Rings* that he felt gave the story a satisfying depth and resonance. On the other hand, Martin noted the challenge to avoid a situation like the finale of the TV series *Lost*, which left some fans disappointed by deviating too far from their own theories and desires.

In 2015, Martin said that he was not writing *A Dream of Spring* together with *The Winds of Winter*, and in early 2016, he said he did not believe *A Dream of Spring* would be published before the last season of the HBO show.

During a question-and-answer session at the 2016 Guadalajara International Book Fair, Martin emphasized: "I'm not going to tell you how I'm going to end my book, but I suspect the overall flavor is going to be as much bittersweet as it is happy."

In April 2018, Martin commented he had not started working on the book, and in November he said that after *The Winds of Winter* he would decide whether his next project after that would be *A Dream of Spring*, the second volume of *Fire & Blood*, or one or two stories for the *Tales of Dunk and Egg*.

In May 2019, Martin reiterated he had not started writing *A Dream of Spring* and would not do so before finishing *The Winds of Winter*.

#### Other writings

Regarding *A Song of Ice and Fire* as his masterpiece, Martin stated he would never write anything on this scale again and would only return to this fictional universe in the context of stand-alone novels. He prefers to write stories about characters from other *A Song of Ice and Fire* periods of history such as his *Tales of Dunk and Egg* project, instead of continuing the series directly. Martin said he would love to return to writing short stories, novellas, novelettes, and stand-alone novels from diverse genres such as science fiction, horror, fantasy, or even a murder mystery.


## Inspiration and writing

### Genre

> [Martin's *Ice and Fire* series] was groundbreaking (at least for me) in all kinds of ways. Above all, the books were extremely unpredictable, especially in a genre where readers have come to expect the intensely predictable. [...] *A Game of Thrones* was profoundly shocking when I first read it, and fundamentally changed my notions about what could be done with epic fantasy.

—

Fantasy writer

Joe Abercrombie

in 2008

George R. R. Martin believes the most profound influences to be the ones experienced in childhood. Having read H. P. Lovecraft, Robert E. Howard, Robert A. Heinlein, Eric Frank Russell, Andre Norton, Isaac Asimov, Fritz Leiber, and Mervyn Peake in his youth, Martin never categorized these authors' literature into science fiction, fantasy, or horror and will write from any genre as a result. Martin classified *A Song of Ice and Fire* as "epic fantasy", and specifically named Tad Williams' high fantasy epic *Memory, Sorrow, and Thorn* as very influential for the writing of the series. One of his favorite authors is Jack Vance, although Martin considered the series not particularly Vancean.

Martin experienced some harsh winters when living in Dubuque a few years in the 1970s, and suspects these winters had an influence on his writing: "I think a lot of the stuff in *A Game of Thrones*, the snow and ice and freezing, comes from my memories of Dubuque".

The medieval setting has been the traditional background for epic fantasy. However, where historical fiction leaves versed readers knowing the historical outcome, original characters may increase suspense and empathy for the readers. Yet Martin felt historical fiction, particularly when set during the Middle Ages, had an excitement, grittiness, and a realness to it that was absent in fantasy with a similar backdrop. Thus, he wanted to combine the realism of historical fiction with the magic appeal of the best fantasies, subduing magic in favor of battles and political intrigue. He also decided to avoid the conventional good versus evil setting typical for the genre, using the fight between Achilles and Hector in Homer's *Iliad*, where no one stands out as either a hero or a villain, as an example of what he wants to achieve with his books.

Martin is widely credited with broadening the fantasy fiction genre for adult content. Writing for *The Atlantic*, Amber Taylor assessed the novels as hard fantasy with vulnerable characters to which readers become emotionally attached. CNN found in 2000 that Martin's mature descriptions were "far more frank than those found in the works of other fantasy authors", although Martin assessed the fantasy genre to have become rougher-edged a decade later and that some writers' work was going beyond the mature themes of his novels. Adam Roberts called Martin's series the most successful and popular example of the emerging subgenre of grimdark fantasy.

### Writing process

Setting out to write something on an epic scale, Martin projected to write three books of 800 manuscript pages in the very early stages of the series. His original 1990s contract specified one-year deadlines for his previous literary works, but Martin only realized later that his new books were longer and hence required more writing time. In 2000, Martin planned to take 18 months to two years for each volume and projected the last of the planned six books to be released five or six years later. However, with *A Song of Ice and Fire* series evolving into the biggest and most ambitious story he has ever attempted writing, he still has two more books to finish as of 2025. Martin said he needed to be in his own office in Santa Fe, New Mexico to immerse himself in the fictional world and write. As of 2011, Martin was still typing his fiction on an IBM PC compatible computer running MS-DOS with WordStar 4.0. He begins each day at 10 am with rewriting and polishing the previous day's work, and may write all day or struggle to write anything. Excised material and previous old versions are saved to be possibly re-inserted at a later time. Martin does not consider *A Song of Ice and Fire* a "series" but a single story published in several volumes.

Martin set the *A Song of Ice and Fire* story in a secondary world inspired by Tolkien's writing. Unlike Tolkien, who created entire languages, mythologies, and histories for Middle-earth long before writing *The Lord of the Rings*, Martin usually starts with a rough sketch of an imaginary world that he improvises into a workable fictional setting along the way. He described his writing as coming from a subconscious level in "almost a daydreaming process", and his stories, which have a mythic rather than a scientific core, draw from emotion instead of rationality. Martin employs maps and a cast list topping 60 pages in the fourth volume, but keeps most information in his mind. His imagined backstory remains subject to change until published, and only the novels count as canon. Martin does not intend to publish his private notes after the series is finished.

Martin drew much inspiration from actual history for the series, having several bookcases filled with medieval history for research and visiting historic European landmarks. For an American who speaks only English, the history of England proved the easiest source of medieval history for him, giving the series a British rather than a German or Spanish historic flavor. For example, Ned and Robb Stark resemble Richard, 3rd Duke of York, and his son Edward IV, and Queen Cersei resembles both Margaret of Anjou and Elizabeth Woodville. Martin immersed himself in many diverse medieval topics such as clothing, food, feasting, and tournaments to have the facts at hand if needed during writing. The series was in particular influenced by the Hundred Years' War, the Crusades, the Albigensian Crusade, and the Wars of the Roses, although Martin refrained from making any direct adaptations. Martin was also inspired by the French historical novels *The Accursed Kings* by Maurice Druon, which are about the French monarchy in the 13th and 14th centuries. Martin has also said that important events of the narrative, such as the "Red Wedding", a crucial plot point in *A Storm of Swords*, are based on events in Scottish history such as the Black Dinner of 1440 and the Massacre of Glencoe in 1692.

Martin has also drawn from Roman history for inspiration, comparing Stannis Baratheon to the Roman Emperor Tiberius.

The story is written to follow principal landmarks with an ultimate destination, but leaves Martin room for improvisation. On occasion, improvised details significantly affected the planned story. By the fourth book, Martin kept more private notes than ever before to keep track of the many subplots, which became so detailed and sprawling by the fifth book as to be unwieldy. Martin's editors, copy editors, and readers monitor for accidental mistakes, although some errors have slipped into publication. For instance, Martin has inconsistently referred to certain characters' eye colors, and has described a horse as being of one sex and then another.

### Narrative structure

| POV character | *Game* | *Clash* | *Storm* | *Feast* | *Dance* | *Winds* | **Sum** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Bran Stark | 7 | 7 | 4 |   | 3 |   | 21 |
| Catelyn Stark | 11 | 7 | 7 |   |   |   | 25 |
| Daenerys Targaryen | 10 | 5 | 6 |   | 10 |   | 31 |
| Eddard Stark | 15 |   |   |   |   |   | 15 |
| Jon Snow | 9 | 8 | 12 |   | 13 |   | 42 |
| Arya Stark | 5 | 10 | 13 | 3 | 2 | ≥1 | ≥34 |
| Tyrion Lannister | 9 | 15 | 11 |   | 12 | ≥2 | ≥49 |
| Sansa Stark | 6 | 8 | 7 | 3 |   | ≥1 | ≥25 |
| Davos Seaworth |   | 3 | 6 |   | 4 |   | 13 |
| Theon Greyjoy |   | 6 |   |   | 7 | ≥1 | ≥14 |
| Jaime Lannister |   |   | 9 | 7 | 1 |   | 17 |
| Samwell Tarly |   |   | 5 | 5 |   |   | 10 |
| Aeron Greyjoy |   |   |   | 2 |   | ≥1 | ≥3 |
| Areo Hotah |   |   |   | 1 | 1 | ≥1 | ≥3 |
| Cersei Lannister |   |   |   | 10 | 2 |   | 12 |
| Brienne of Tarth |   |   |   | 8 |   |   | 8 |
| Asha Greyjoy |   |   |   | 1 | 3 |   | 4 |
| Arys Oakheart |   |   |   | 1 |   |   | 1 |
| Victarion Greyjoy |   |   |   | 2 | 2 | ≥1 | ≥5 |
| Arianne Martell |   |   |   | 2 |   | ≥2 | ≥4 |
| Quentyn Martell |   |   |   |   | 4 |   | 4 |
| Jon Connington |   |   |   |   | 2 |   | 2 |
| Melisandre |   |   |   |   | 1 |   | 1 |
| Barristan Selmy |   |   |   |   | 4 |   | 4 |
| Prologue/Epilogue | 1/– | 1/– | 1/1 | 1/– | 1/1 | 1/TBD | ≥8 |
| Total (characters) | 73 (9) | 70 (10) | 82 (12) | 46 (13) | 73 (18) | ≥13 (≥9) | ≥357 (≥24) |

|   | Appears as a POV character |
|---|---|
|   | Appears as a non-POV character |
|   | No appearance |

The books are divided into chapters, each one narrated in the third person limited through the eyes of a point of view character, an approach Martin learned himself as a young journalism student. Beginning with nine POV characters in *A Game of Thrones*, the number of POV characters grows to a total of 31 in *A Dance with Dragons* (see table). The short-lived one-time POV characters are mostly restricted to the prologues and epilogues. David Orr of *The New York Times* noted the importance of "the Starks (good guys), the Targaryens (at least one good guy, or girl), the Lannisters (conniving), the Greyjoys (mostly conniving), the Baratheons (mixed bag), the Tyrells (unclear), and the Martells (ditto), most of whom are feverishly endeavoring to advance their ambitions and ruin their enemies, preferably unto death". However, as *Time*'s Lev Grossman noted, readers "experience the struggle for Westeros from all sides at once", such that "every fight is both triumph and tragedy [...] and everybody is both hero and villain at the same time".

Modeled on *The Lord of the Rings*, the story of *A Song of Ice and Fire* begins with a tight focus on a small group (with everyone in Winterfell, except Daenerys) and then splits into separate stories. The storylines are to converge again, but finding the turning point in this complex series has been difficult for Martin and has slowed down his writing. Depending on the interview, Martin is said to have reached the turning point in *A Dance with Dragons*, or to not quite have reached it yet in the books. The series' structure of multiple POVs and interwoven storylines was inspired by *Wild Cards*, a multi-authored shared universe book series edited by Martin since 1985. As the sole author, Martin begins each new book with an outline of the chapter order and may write a few successive chapters from a single character's viewpoint instead of working chronologically. The chapters are later rearranged to optimize character intercutting, chronology, and suspense.

Influenced by his television and film scripting background, Martin tries to keep readers engrossed by ending each *Song of Ice and Fire* chapter with a tense or revelational moment, a twist or a cliffhanger, similar to a TV act break. Scriptwriting has also taught him the technique of "cutting out the fat and leaving the muscle", which is the final stage of completing a book, a technique that brought the page count in *A Dance with Dragons* down almost eighty pages. Dividing the continuous *Song of Ice and Fire* story into books is much harder for Martin. Each book shall represent a phase of the journey that ends in closure for most characters. A smaller portion of characters is left with clear-cut cliffhangers to make sure readers come back for the next installment, although *A Dance with Dragons* had more cliffhangers than Martin originally intended. Both one-time and regular POV characters are designed to have full character arcs ending in tragedy or triumph, and are written to hold the readers' interest and not be skipped in reading. Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not rely on the hero to come through unscathed and will instead feel the character's fear with each page turn.

The unresolved larger narrative arc encourages speculation about future story events. According to Martin, much of the key to *A Song of Ice and Fire*'s future lies over a dozen years in the fictional past, of which each volume reveals more. Events planned from the beginning are foreshadowed, although Martin is careful not to make the story predictable. The viewpoint characters, who serve as unreliable narrators, may clarify or provide different perspectives on past events. Therefore, what the readers believe to be true may not necessarily be true.

### Character development

Regarding the characters as the heart of the story, Martin planned the epic *A Song of Ice and Fire* to have a large cast of characters and many different settings from the beginning. *A Feast for Crows* has a 63-page list of characters, with many of the thousands of characters mentioned only in passing or disappearing from view for long stretches. When Martin adds a new family to the ever-growing number of genealogies in the appendices, he devises a secret about the personality or fate of the family members. However, their backstory remains subject to change until written down in the story. Martin drew most character inspiration from history (without directly translating historical figures) and his own experiences, but also from the manners of his friends, acquaintances, and people of public interest. Martin aims to "make my characters real and to make them human, characters who have good and bad, noble and selfish well-mixed in their natures". Jeff VanderMeer of the *Los Angeles Times* remarked that "Martin's devotion to fully inhabiting his characters, for better or worse, creates the unstoppable momentum in his novels and contains an implied criticism of Tolkien's moral simplicity" (see Themes: Moral ambiguity).

Martin deliberately ignored the writing rule of never giving two characters names starting with the same letter. Instead, character names reflect the naming systems in various European family histories, where particular names were associated with specific royal houses and where even the secondary families assigned the same names repeatedly. The story of *A Song of Ice and Fire* therefore has children called "Robert" in honor of King Robert of House Baratheon, a "Brandon" in many generations of the Starks in commemoration of Brandon the Builder (of the Wall), and the syllable "Ty" commonly occurring in given names of House Lannister. Confident that readers would pay attention, Martin distinguished people sharing a given name by adding numbers or locations to their given names (e.g. Henry V of England). The family names were designed in association with ethnic groups (see backstory): the First Men in the North of Westeros had very simply descriptive names like Stark and Strong, whereas the descendants of the Andal invaders in the South have more elaborate, undescriptive house names like Lannister or Arryn, and the Targaryens (being Valyrians from the Eastern continent), have the most exotic names with the letter Y.

All characters are designed to speak with their own internal voices to capture their views of the world. *The Atlantic* pondered whether Martin ultimately intended the readers to sympathize with characters on both sides of the Lannister–Stark feud long before plot developments force them to make their emotional choices. Contrary to most conventional epic fantasies, the characters of *A Song of Ice and Fire* are vulnerable so that, according to *The Atlantic*, the reader "cannot be sure that good shall triumph, which makes those instances where it does all the more exulting." Martin gets emotionally involved in the characters' lives during writing, which makes the chapters with dreadful events sometimes very difficult to write. Seeing the world through the characters' eyes requires a certain amount of empathy with them, including the villains, all of whom he has said he loves as if they were his own children. Martin found that some characters had minds of their own and took his writing in different directions. He returns to the intended story if it does not work out, but these detours sometimes prove more rewarding for him.

Arya Stark, Tyrion Lannister, Jon Snow, and Daenerys Targaryen generate the most feedback from readers. They are also four of the "big six" main characters of the series, according to Martin (the other two being Sansa Stark and Bran Stark). Martin has stated that Tyrion is his personal favorite, as the grayest of the gray characters, with his cunning and wit making him the most fun to write. Martin has also said that Bran Stark is the hardest character to write. As the character most deeply involved in magic, Bran's story needs to be handled carefully within the supernatural aspects of the books. Bran is also the youngest viewpoint character, and has to deal with the series' adult themes like grief, loneliness, and anger. Martin set out to have the young characters grow up faster between chapters, but, as it was implausible for a character to take two months to respond, a finished book represents very little time passed. Martin hoped the planned five-year break would ease the situation and age the children to almost adults in terms of the Seven Kingdoms, but he later dropped the five-year gap (see section Bridging the timeline gap).


## Themes

Wheareas modern fantasy often embraces magical elements, *A Song of Ice and Fire* series is generally praised for what is perceived as a sort of medieval realism. Believing that magic should be used moderately in the epic fantasy genre, Martin set out to make the story feel more like historical fiction than contemporary fantasy, with less emphasis on magic and more on battles, political intrigue, and the characters. Though the amount of magic has gradually increased throughout the story, the series is still to end with less overt magic than most contemporary fantasies. In Martin's eyes, literary effective magic needs to represent strange and dangerous forces beyond human comprehension, not advanced alien technologies or formulaic spells. As such, the characters understand only the natural aspects of their world, but not the magical elements like the Others.

Since Martin drew on historical sources to build the world of *A Song of Ice and Fire*, Damien G. Walter of *The Guardian* saw a strong resemblance between Westeros and England in the period of the Wars of the Roses. *The Atlantic*'s Adam Serwer regarded *A Song of Ice and Fire* as "more a story of politics than one of heroism, a story about humanity wrestling with its baser obsessions than fulfilling its glorious potential", where the emergent power struggle stems from the feudal system's repression and not from the fight between good and evil. Martin not only wanted to reflect the frictions of the medieval class structures in the novels, but also explore the consequences of the leaders' decisions, as general goodness does not automatically make competent leaders and vice versa.

A common theme in the fantasy genre is the battle between good and evil, which Martin rejects for not mirroring the real world. Attracted to gray characters, Martin instead endorses William Faulkner's view that only the human heart in conflict with itself was worth writing about. Martin explores the questions of redemption and character change in the *A Song of Ice and Fire* series. The multiple viewpoint structure allows characters to be explored from many sides, such that the supposed villains can provide their viewpoint.

Although fantasy comes from an imaginative realm, Martin sees an honest necessity to reflect the real world where people, even beloved people, sometimes die ugly deaths. Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not expect the supposed hero to survive, and instead will feel the same tension and fear that the characters might. The novels also reflect the substantial death rates in war. The deaths of supernumerary extras, or of orcs or their equivalents, have no major effect on readers, whereas a friend's death has much more emotional impact. Martin prefers a hero's sacrifice to say something profound about human nature.

According to Martin, the fantasy genre rarely focuses on sex and sexuality, instead often treating sexuality in a juvenile way or neglecting it completely. Martin, however, considers sexuality an important driving force in human life that should not be excluded from the narrative. Providing sensory detail for an immersive experience is more important than plot advancement for Martin, who aims to let the readers experience the novels' sex scenes, "whether it's a great transcendent, exciting, mind blowing sex, or whether it's disturbing, twisted, dark sex, or disappointing perfunctory sex." Martin was fascinated by medieval contrasts where knights venerated their ladies with poems and wore their favors in tournaments while their armies mindlessly raped women in wartime. The non-existent concept of adolescence in the Middle Ages served as a model for Daenerys' sexual activity at the age of 13 in the books. The novels also allude to the incestuous practices in the Ptolemaic dynasty of Ancient Egypt to keep their bloodlines pure.

Martin provides a variety of female characters to explore the place of women in a patriarchal society. Writing all characters as human beings with the same basic needs, dreams, and influences, his female characters are to cover the same wide spectrum of human traits as the males.
