---
title: "GNU make (part 1/17)"
source: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html
domain: build-systems
license: GFDL-1.3 / CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: makefile, cmake, build system, compiler toolchain
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 1/17
---

# GNU `make`

Next: Overview of `make`, Previous: (dir), Up: (dir)   [Contents][Index]

# GNU `make`

This file documents the GNU `make` utility, which determines automatically which pieces of a large program need to be recompiled, and issues the commands to recompile them.

This is Edition 0.77, last updated 26 February 2023, of *The GNU Make Manual*, for GNU `make` version 4.4.1.

Copyright © 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

> Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being “A GNU Manual,” and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled “GNU Free Documentation License.”
> 
> (a) The FSF’s Back-Cover Text is: “You have the freedom to copy and modify this GNU manual. Buying copies from the FSF supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.”


## Short Table of Contents

- 1 Overview of `make`
- 2 An Introduction to Makefiles
- 3 Writing Makefiles
- 4 Writing Rules
- 5 Writing Recipes in Rules
- 6 How to Use Variables
- 7 Conditional Parts of Makefiles
- 8 Functions for Transforming Text
- 9 How to Run `make`
- 10 Using Implicit Rules
- 11 Using `make` to Update Archive Files
- 12 Extending GNU `make`
- 13 Integrating GNU `make`
- 14 Features of GNU `make`
- 15 Incompatibilities and Missing Features
- 16 Makefile Conventions
- Appendix A Quick Reference
- Appendix B Errors Generated by Make
- Appendix C Complex Makefile Example
- Appendix D GNU Free Documentation License
- Index of Concepts
- Index of Functions, Variables, & Directives

Next: An Introduction to Makefiles, Previous: GNU `make`, Up: GNU `make`   [Contents][Index]


## 1 Overview of `make`

The `make` utility automatically determines which pieces of a large program need to be recompiled, and issues commands to recompile them. This manual describes GNU `make`, which was implemented by Richard Stallman and Roland McGrath. Development since Version 3.76 has been handled by Paul D. Smith.

GNU `make` conforms to section 6.2 of *IEEE Standard 1003.2-1992* (POSIX.2).

Our examples show C programs, since they are most common, but you can use `make` with any programming language whose compiler can be run with a shell command. Indeed, `make` is not limited to programs. You can use it to describe any task where some files must be updated automatically from others whenever the others change.

Next: How to Read This Manual, Previous: Overview of `make`, Up: Overview of `make`   [Contents][Index]

#### Preparing

### Preparing and Running Make

To prepare to use `make`, you must write a file called the *makefile* that describes the relationships among files in your program and provides commands for updating each file. In a program, typically, the executable file is updated from object files, which are in turn made by compiling source files.

Once a suitable makefile exists, each time you change some source files, this simple shell command:

```
make
```

suffices to perform all necessary recompilations. The `make` program uses the makefile data base and the last-modification times of the files to decide which of the files need to be updated. For each of those files, it issues the recipes recorded in the data base.

You can provide command line arguments to `make` to control which files should be recompiled, or how. See How to Run `make`.

Next: Problems and Bugs, Previous: Preparing, Up: Overview of `make`   [Contents][Index]

### 1.1 How to Read This Manual

If you are new to `make`, or are looking for a general introduction, read the first few sections of each chapter, skipping the later sections. In each chapter, the first few sections contain introductory or general information and the later sections contain specialized or technical information. The exception is the second chapter, An Introduction to Makefiles, all of which is introductory.

If you are familiar with other `make` programs, see Features of GNU `make`, which lists the enhancements GNU `make` has, and Incompatibilities and Missing Features, which explains the few things GNU `make` lacks that others have.

For a quick summary, see Summary of Options, Quick Reference, and Special Built-in Target Names.

Previous: How to Read This Manual, Up: Overview of `make`   [Contents][Index]

### 1.2 Problems and Bugs

If you have problems with GNU `make` or think you’ve found a bug, please report it to the developers; we cannot promise to do anything but we might well want to fix it.

Before reporting a bug, make sure you’ve actually found a real bug. Carefully reread the documentation and see if it really says you can do what you’re trying to do. If it’s not clear whether you should be able to do something or not, report that too; it’s a bug in the documentation!

Before reporting a bug or trying to fix it yourself, try to isolate it to the smallest possible makefile that reproduces the problem. Then send us the makefile and the exact results `make` gave you, including any error or warning messages. Please don’t paraphrase these messages: it’s best to cut and paste them into your report. When generating this small makefile, be sure to not use any non-free or unusual tools in your recipes: you can almost always emulate what such a tool would do with simple shell commands. Finally, be sure to explain what you expected to occur; this will help us decide whether the problem was really in the documentation.

Once you have a precise problem you can report it in one of two ways. Either send electronic mail to:

```
    bug-make@gnu.org
```

or use our Web-based project management tool, at:

```
    https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/make/
```

In addition to the information above, please be careful to include the version number of `make` you are using. You can get this information with the command ‘make --version’. Be sure also to include the type of machine and operating system you are using. One way to obtain this information is by looking at the final lines of output from the command ‘make --help’.

If you have a code change you’d like to submit, see the README file section “Submitting Patches” for information.

Next: Writing Makefiles, Previous: Overview of `make`, Up: GNU `make`   [Contents][Index]


## 2 An Introduction to Makefiles

You need a file called a *makefile* to tell `make` what to do. Most often, the makefile tells `make` how to compile and link a program.

In this chapter, we will discuss a simple makefile that describes how to compile and link a text editor which consists of eight C source files and three header files. The makefile can also tell `make` how to run miscellaneous commands when explicitly asked (for example, to remove certain files as a clean-up operation). To see a more complex example of a makefile, see Complex Makefile Example.

When `make` recompiles the editor, each changed C source file must be recompiled. If a header file has changed, each C source file that includes the header file must be recompiled to be safe. Each compilation produces an object file corresponding to the source file. Finally, if any source file has been recompiled, all the object files, whether newly made or saved from previous compilations, must be linked together to produce the new executable editor.

Next: A Simple Makefile, Previous: An Introduction to Makefiles, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.1 What a Rule Looks Like

A simple makefile consists of “rules” with the following shape:

```
target … : prerequisites …
        recipe
        …
        …
```

A *target* is usually the name of a file that is generated by a program; examples of targets are executable or object files. A target can also be the name of an action to carry out, such as ‘clean’ (see Phony Targets).

A *prerequisite* is a file that is used as input to create the target. A target often depends on several files.

A *recipe* is an action that `make` carries out. A recipe may have more than one command, either on the same line or each on its own line. **Please note:** you need to put a tab character at the beginning of every recipe line! This is an obscurity that catches the unwary. If you prefer to prefix your recipes with a character other than tab, you can set the `.RECIPEPREFIX` variable to an alternate character (see Other Special Variables).

Usually a recipe is in a rule with prerequisites and serves to create a target file if any of the prerequisites change. However, the rule that specifies a recipe for the target need not have prerequisites. For example, the rule containing the delete command associated with the target ‘clean’ does not have prerequisites.

A *rule*, then, explains how and when to remake certain files which are the targets of the particular rule. `make` carries out the recipe on the prerequisites to create or update the target. A rule can also explain how and when to carry out an action. See Writing Rules.

A makefile may contain other text besides rules, but a simple makefile need only contain rules. Rules may look somewhat more complicated than shown in this template, but all fit the pattern more or less.

Next: How `make` Processes a Makefile, Previous: What a Rule Looks Like, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.2 A Simple Makefile

Here is a straightforward makefile that describes the way an executable file called `edit` depends on eight object files which, in turn, depend on eight C source and three header files.

In this example, all the C files include defs.h, but only those defining editing commands include command.h, and only low level files that change the editor buffer include buffer.h.

```
edit : main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
       insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
        cc -o edit main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
                   insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

main.o : main.c defs.h
        cc -c main.c
kbd.o : kbd.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c kbd.c
command.o : command.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c command.c
display.o : display.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c display.c
insert.o : insert.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c insert.c
search.o : search.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c search.c
files.o : files.c defs.h buffer.h command.h
        cc -c files.c
utils.o : utils.c defs.h
        cc -c utils.c
clean :
        rm edit main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
           insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
```

We split each long line into two lines using backslash/newline; this is like using one long line, but is easier to read. See Splitting Long Lines.

To use this makefile to create the executable file called edit, type:

```
make
```

To use this makefile to delete the executable file and all the object files from the directory, type:

```
make clean
```

In the example makefile, the targets include the executable file ‘edit’, and the object files ‘main.o’ and ‘kbd.o’. The prerequisites are files such as ‘main.c’ and ‘defs.h’. In fact, each ‘.o’ file is both a target and a prerequisite. Recipes include ‘cc -c main.c’ and ‘cc -c kbd.c’.

When a target is a file, it needs to be recompiled or relinked if any of its prerequisites change. In addition, any prerequisites that are themselves automatically generated should be updated first. In this example, edit depends on each of the eight object files; the object file main.o depends on the source file main.c and on the header file defs.h.

A recipe may follow each line that contains a target and prerequisites. These recipes say how to update the target file. A tab character (or whatever character is specified by the `.RECIPEPREFIX` variable; see Other Special Variables) must come at the beginning of every line in the recipe to distinguish recipes from other lines in the makefile. (Bear in mind that `make` does not know anything about how the recipes work. It is up to you to supply recipes that will update the target file properly. All `make` does is execute the recipe you have specified when the target file needs to be updated.)

The target ‘clean’ is not a file, but merely the name of an action. Since you normally do not want to carry out the actions in this rule, ‘clean’ is not a prerequisite of any other rule. Consequently, `make` never does anything with it unless you tell it specifically. Note that this rule not only is not a prerequisite, it also does not have any prerequisites, so the only purpose of the rule is to run the specified recipe. Targets that do not refer to files but are just actions are called *phony targets*. See Phony Targets, for information about this kind of target. See Errors in Recipes, to see how to cause `make` to ignore errors from `rm` or any other command.

Next: Variables Make Makefiles Simpler, Previous: A Simple Makefile, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.3 How `make` Processes a Makefile

By default, `make` starts with the first target (not targets whose names start with ‘.’ unless they also contain one or more ‘/’). This is called the *default goal*. (*Goals* are the targets that `make` strives ultimately to update. You can override this behavior using the command line (see Arguments to Specify the Goals) or with the `.DEFAULT_GOAL` special variable (see Other Special Variables).

In the simple example of the previous section, the default goal is to update the executable program edit; therefore, we put that rule first.

Thus, when you give the command:

```
make
```

`make` reads the makefile in the current directory and begins by processing the first rule. In the example, this rule is for relinking edit; but before `make` can fully process this rule, it must process the rules for the files that edit depends on, which in this case are the object files. Each of these files is processed according to its own rule. These rules say to update each ‘.o’ file by compiling its source file. The recompilation must be done if the source file, or any of the header files named as prerequisites, is more recent than the object file, or if the object file does not exist.

The other rules are processed because their targets appear as prerequisites of the goal. If some other rule is not depended on by the goal (or anything it depends on, etc.), that rule is not processed, unless you tell `make` to do so (with a command such as `make clean`).

Before recompiling an object file, `make` considers updating its prerequisites, the source file and header files. This makefile does not specify anything to be done for them—the ‘.c’ and ‘.h’ files are not the targets of any rules—so `make` does nothing for these files. But `make` would update automatically generated C programs, such as those made by Bison or Yacc, by their own rules at this time.

After recompiling whichever object files need it, `make` decides whether to relink edit. This must be done if the file edit does not exist, or if any of the object files are newer than it. If an object file was just recompiled, it is now newer than edit, so edit is relinked.

Thus, if we change the file insert.c and run `make`, `make` will compile that file to update insert.o, and then link edit. If we change the file command.h and run `make`, `make` will recompile the object files kbd.o, command.o and files.o and then link the file edit.

Next: Letting `make` Deduce the Recipes, Previous: How `make` Processes a Makefile, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.4 Variables Make Makefiles Simpler

In our example, we had to list all the object files twice in the rule for edit (repeated here):

```
edit : main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
              insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
        cc -o edit main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
                   insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
```

Such duplication is error-prone; if a new object file is added to the system, we might add it to one list and forget the other. We can eliminate the risk and simplify the makefile by using a variable. *Variables* allow a text string to be defined once and substituted in multiple places later (see How to Use Variables).

It is standard practice for every makefile to have a variable named `objects`, `OBJECTS`, `objs`, `OBJS`, `obj`, or `OBJ` which is a list of all object file names. We would define such a variable `objects` with a line like this in the makefile:

```
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
```

Then, each place we want to put a list of the object file names, we can substitute the variable’s value by writing ‘$(objects)’ (see How to Use Variables).

Here is how the complete simple makefile looks when you use a variable for the object files:

```
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)
main.o : main.c defs.h
        cc -c main.c
kbd.o : kbd.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c kbd.c
command.o : command.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c command.c
display.o : display.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c display.c
insert.o : insert.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c insert.c
search.o : search.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c search.c
files.o : files.c defs.h buffer.h command.h
        cc -c files.c
utils.o : utils.c defs.h
        cc -c utils.c
clean :
        rm edit $(objects)
```

Next: Another Style of Makefile, Previous: Variables Make Makefiles Simpler, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.5 Letting `make` Deduce the Recipes

It is not necessary to spell out the recipes for compiling the individual C source files, because `make` can figure them out: it has an *implicit rule* for updating a ‘.o’ file from a correspondingly named ‘.c’ file using a ‘cc -c’ command. For example, it will use the recipe ‘cc -c main.c -o main.o’ to compile main.c into main.o. We can therefore omit the recipes from the rules for the object files. See Using Implicit Rules.

When a ‘.c’ file is used automatically in this way, it is also automatically added to the list of prerequisites. We can therefore omit the ‘.c’ files from the prerequisites, provided we omit the recipe.

Here is the entire example, with both of these changes, and a variable `objects` as suggested above:

```
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)

main.o : defs.h
kbd.o : defs.h command.h
command.o : defs.h command.h
display.o : defs.h buffer.h
insert.o : defs.h buffer.h
search.o : defs.h buffer.h
files.o : defs.h buffer.h command.h
utils.o : defs.h

.PHONY : clean
clean :
        rm edit $(objects)
```

This is how we would write the makefile in actual practice. (The complications associated with ‘clean’ are described elsewhere. See Phony Targets, and Errors in Recipes.)

Because implicit rules are so convenient, they are important. You will see them used frequently.

Next: Rules for Cleaning the Directory, Previous: Letting `make` Deduce the Recipes, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.6 Another Style of Makefile

When the objects of a makefile are created only by implicit rules, an alternative style of makefile is possible. In this style of makefile, you group entries by their prerequisites instead of by their targets. Here is what one looks like:

```
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)

$(objects) : defs.h
kbd.o command.o files.o : command.h
display.o insert.o search.o files.o : buffer.h
```

Here defs.h is given as a prerequisite of all the object files; command.h and buffer.h are prerequisites of the specific object files listed for them.

Whether this is better is a matter of taste: it is more compact, but some people dislike it because they find it clearer to put all the information about each target in one place.

Previous: Another Style of Makefile, Up: An Introduction to Makefiles   [Contents][Index]

### 2.7 Rules for Cleaning the Directory

Compiling a program is not the only thing you might want to write rules for. Makefiles commonly tell how to do a few other things besides compiling a program: for example, how to delete all the object files and executables so that the directory is ‘clean’.

Here is how we could write a `make` rule for cleaning our example editor:

```
clean:
        rm edit $(objects)
```

In practice, we might want to write the rule in a somewhat more complicated manner to handle unanticipated situations. We would do this:

```
.PHONY : clean
clean :
        -rm edit $(objects)
```

This prevents `make` from getting confused by an actual file called clean and causes it to continue in spite of errors from `rm`. (See Phony Targets, and Errors in Recipes.)

A rule such as this should not be placed at the beginning of the makefile, because we do not want it to run by default! Thus, in the example makefile, we want the rule for `edit`, which recompiles the editor, to remain the default goal.

Since `clean` is not a prerequisite of `edit`, this rule will not run at all if we give the command ‘make’ with no arguments. In order to make the rule run, we have to type ‘make clean’. See How to Run `make`.

Next: Writing Rules, Previous: An Introduction to Makefiles, Up: GNU `make`   [Contents][Index]
