---
title: "Citizen science (part 3/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizen_science
domain: anecdata-org
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: anecdata.org
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 3/3
---

## Around the world

The Citizen Science Global Partnership was created in 2022; the partnership brings together networks from Australia, Africa, Asia, Europe, South America and the USA.

### Africa

- In South Africa (SA), citizen science projects include: the Stream Assessment Scoring System (miniSASS) which "encourages enhanced catchment management for water security in a climate stressed society."
- The South African National Biodiversity Institute is partnered with iNaturalist as a platform for biodiversity observations using digital photography and geolocation technology to monitor biodiversity. Such partnerships can reduce duplication of effort, help standardise procedures and make the data more accessible.
- Also in SA, "Members of the public, or 'citizen scientists' are helping researchers from the University of Pretoria to identify Phytophthora species present in the fynbos."
- In June 2016, citizen science experts from across East Africa gathered in Nairobi, Kenya, for a symposium organised by the Tropical Biology Association (TBA) in partnership with the Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (CEH). The aim was "to harness the growing interest and expertise in East Africa to stimulate new ideas and collaborations in citizen science." Rosie Trevelyan of the TBA said: "We need to enhance our knowledge about the status of Africa's species and the threats facing them. And scientists can't do it all on their own. At the same time, citizen science is an extremely effective way of connecting people more closely to nature and enrolling more people in conservation action".
- The website Zooniverse hosts several African citizen science projects, including: Snapshot Serengeti, Wildcam Gorongosa and Jungle Rhythms.
- Nigeria has the Ibadan Bird Club whose to aim is to "exchange ideas and share knowledge about birds, and get actively involved in the conservation of birds and biodiversity."
- In Namibia, Giraffe Spotter.org is "project that will provide people with an online citizen science platform for giraffes".
- Within the Republic of the Congo, the territories of an indigenous people have been mapped so that "the Mbendjele tribe can protect treasured trees from being cut down by logging companies". An Android open-source app called Sapelli was used by the Mbendjele which helped them map "their tribal lands and highlighted trees that were important to them, usually for medicinal reasons or religious significance. Congolaise Industrielle des Bois then verified the trees that the tribe documented as valuable and removed them from its cutting schedule. The tribe also documented illegal logging and poaching activities."
- In West Africa, the eradication of the recent outbreak of Ebola virus disease was partly helped by citizen science. "Communities learnt how to assess the risks posed by the disease independently of prior cultural assumptions, and local empiricism allowed cultural rules to be reviewed, suspended or changed as epidemiological facts emerged." "Citizen science is alive and well in all three Ebola-affected countries. And if only a fraction of the international aid directed at rebuilding health systems were to be redirected towards support for citizen science, that might be a fitting memorial to those who died in the epidemic."

The CitSci Africa Association held its International Conference in February 2024 in Nairobi.

### Asia

- The Hong Kong Birdwatching Society was established in 1957, and is the only local civil society aiming at appreciating and conserving Hong Kong birds and their natural environment. Their bird surveys go back to 1958, and they carry out a number of Citizen Science events such as their yearly sparrow census.
- The Bird Count India partnership consists of a large number of organizations and groups involved in birdwatching and bird surveys. They coordinate a number of Citizen Science projects such as the Kerala Bird Atlas and Mysore city Bird Atlas that map the distribution and abundance of birds of entire Indian states.
- RAD@home Collaboratory is an Indian citizen science research programme in astronomy & astrophysics. Launched on 15 April 2013, by Dr Ananda Hota, this programme uses hybrid model, social media platforms and in-person training of the interested participants. In 2022, the Collaboratory, using GMRT observations and archival data from other telescopes, reported discovery of an active galactic nucleus, a radio galaxy named RAD12, spewing a large unipolar radio bubble on to its merging companion galaxy. Recently, on 2 October 2025 the Collaboratory reported discovery of the farthest and most powerful Odd Radio Circle (ORC), RAD J131346.9+500320, using the LOFAR radio telescope data.
- The Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network was founded in 2011 and has more than 16,000 members as of 2019. It is a citizen science project where roadkill across Taiwan is photographed and sent to the Endemic Species Research Institute for study. Its primary goal has been to set up an eco-friendly path to mitigate roadkill challenges and popularize a national discourse on environmental issues and civil participation in scientific research. The members of the Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network volunteer to observe animals' corpses that are by caused by roadkill or by other reasons. Volunteers can then upload pictures and geographic locations of the roadkill to an internet database or send the corpses to the Endemic Species Research as specimens. Because members come from different areas of the island, the collection of data serves as an animal distribution map of the island. According to the geographical data and pictures of corpses collected by the members, the community itself and the sponsor, the Endemic Species Center could find out the hotspots and the reasons for the animals' deaths. One of the most renowned cases is that the community successfully detected rabies cases due to the huge collection of data. The corpses of *Melogale moschata* had accumulated for years and are thought to be carriers of rabies. Alarmed by this, the government authority took actions to prevent the prevalence of rabies in Taiwan. In another case in 2014, some citizen scientists discovered birds that had died from unknown causes near an agricultural area. The Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network cooperated with National Pingtung University of Science and Technology and engaged citizen scientists to collect bird corpses. The volunteers collected 250 bird corpses for laboratory tests, which confirmed that the bird deaths were attributable to pesticides used on crops. This prompted the Taiwanese government to restrict pesticides, and the Bill of Pesticide Management amendment was passed after the third reading in the Legislative Yuan, establishing a pesticide control system. The results indicated that Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network had developed a set of shared working methods and jointly completed certain actions. Furthermore, the community of the Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network had made real changes to road design to avoid roadkill, improved the management of usage of pesticide, epidemic prevention, as well as other examples. By mid-2024, volunteers had observed over 293,000 animals. The network, the largest citizen science project in Taiwan, noted that more than half of roadkill were amphibians (eg, frogs), while one third are reptiles and birds.
- The AirBox Project was launched in Taiwan to create a participatory ecosystem with a focus on PM2.5 monitoring through AirBox devices. By the end of 2014, the public had paid more attention to the PM2.5 levels because the air pollution problem had become worse, especially in central and southern Taiwan. High PM2.5 levels are harmful to our health, with respiratory problems as an example. These pollution levels aroused public concern and led to an intensive debate about air pollution sources. Some experts suggested that air quality was affected by pollutants from mainland China, while some environmentalists believed that it was the result of industrialization, because of, for example, exhaust fumes from local power plants or factories. However, no one knew the answer because of insufficient data. Dr. Ling-Jyh Chen, a researcher of the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, launched The AirBox Project. His original idea was inspired by a popular Taiwanese slogan "Save Your Environment by Yourself". As an expert in a Participatory Sensing system, he decided to take this ground-up approach to collect PM2.5 level data, and thus through open data and data analysis to have a better understanding of the possible air pollution sources. Using this ecosystem, huge amounts of data was collected from AirBox devices. This data was instantly available online, informing people of PM2.5 levels. They could then take the proper actions, such as wearing a mask or staying at home, preventing themselves from going out into the polluted environment. Data can also be analyzed to understand the possible sources of pollution and provide recommendations for improving the situation. There are four main steps to this project: **i)** Develop the AirBox device. Developing a device that could correctly collect the data of the PM2.5 level was time-consuming. It had taken more than three years to develop an AirBox that can be easily used, but with both high accuracy and low cost. **ii)** The widespread installation of AirBoxes. In the beginning, very few people were willing to install it at their homes because of their concerns about the possible harm to their health, power consumption and maintenance. Because of this, AirBoxes were only installed in a relatively small area. But with help from Taiwan's LASS (Location Aware Sensing System) community, AirBoxes appeared in all parts of Taiwan. As of February 2017, there are more than 1,600 AirBoxes installed in more than 27 countries. **iii)** Open Source and Data Analysis. All measurement results were released and visualized in real-time to the public through different media. Data can be analyzed to trace pollution sources. By December 2019, there were over 4,000 AirBoxes installed across the country.
- Japan has a long history of citizen science involvement, the 1,200-year-old tradition of collecting records on cherry blossom flowering probably being the world's longest-running citizen science project. One of the most influential citizen science projects has also come out of Japan: Safecast. Dedicated to open citizen science for the environment, Safecast was established in the wake of the Fukushima nuclear disaster, and produces open hardware sensors for radiation and air-pollution mapping. Presenting this data via a global open data network and maps

As technology and public interest grew, the *CitizenScience.Asia* group was set up in 2022; it grew from an initial hackathon in Hong Kong which worked on the 2016 Zika scare. The network is part of Citizen Science Global Partnership.

### Europe

The English naturalist Charles Darwin (1809–1882) is widely regarded to have been one of the earliest citizen science contributors in Europe (see § History). A century later, citizen science was experienced by adolescents in Italy during the 1980s, working on urban energy usages and air pollution.

In his book "Citizen Science", Alan Irwin considers the role that scientific expertise can play in bringing the public and science together and building a more scientifically active citizenry, empowering individuals to contribute to scientific development. Since then a citizen science green paper was published in 2013, and European Commission policy directives have included citizen science as one of five strategic areas with funding allocated to support initiatives through the 'Science With and For Society (SwafS)', a strand of the Horizon 2020 programme. This includes significant awards such as the EU Citizen Science Project, which is creating a hub for knowledge sharing, coordination, and action. The European Citizen Science Association (ECSA) was set up in 2014 to encourage the growth of citizen science across Europe, to increase public participation in scientific processes, mainly by initiating and supporting citizen science projects as well as conducting research. ECSA has a membership of over 250 individual and organisational members from over 30 countries across the European Union and beyond.

Examples of citizen science organisations and associations based in Europe include the Biosphere Expeditions (Ireland), Bürger schaffen Wissen (Germany), Scivil (Belgium), Citizen Science Lab at Leiden University (Netherlands), Ibercivis (See External Links), Österreich forscht (Austria). Other organisations can be found here: EU Citizen Science.

The European Citizen Science Association was created in 2014, with some nations also having national bodies, such as Citizen Science Ireland.

In 2023, the European Union Prize for Citizen Science was established. Bestowed through Ars Electronica, the prize was designed to honor, present and support "outstanding projects whose social and political impact advances the further development of a pluralistic, inclusive and sustainable society in Europe".

#### Example projects

- Garden birdwatches such as the Irish Garden Bird Survey by BirdWatch Ireland and the Big Garden Birdwatch by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds invite members of the public to record the wild birds that they see in their garden. The species are then tracked over time.
- Photographs of The Northern Lights or "Aurora Borealis" over the island of Ireland taken by the public were collected by scientists in Ireland, in a project called Aurora Éire.
- Water Blitz is a citizen science project by Dublin City University, where citizen scientists help collect water samples and provide their perspectives on water quality and pollution.
- The Irish Hedgehog Survey coordinated by scientists at the National University of Ireland at Galway encourages recording on the distribution and health of hedgehogs in Ireland

### Latin America

- In 2015, the Asháninka people from Apiwtxa, which crosses the border between Brazil and Peru, began using the Android app Sapelli to monitor their land. The Ashaninka have "faced historical pressures of disease, exploitation and displacement, and today still face the illegal invasion of their lands by loggers and hunters. This monitoring project shows how the Apiwtxa Ashaninka from the Kampa do Rio Amônia Indigenous Territory, Brazil, are beginning to use smartphones and technological tools to monitor these illegal activities more effectively."
- In Argentina, two smartphone Android applications are available for citizen science. **i)** AppEAR has been developed at the Institute of Limnology and was launched in May 2016. Joaquín Cochero is a researcher who developed an "application that appeals to the collaboration of users of mobile devices in collecting data that allow the study of aquatic ecosystems" (translation). Cochero stated: "Not much of citizen science in Argentina, just a few more oriented to astronomy specific cases. As ours is the first. And I have volunteers from different parts of the country that are interested in joining together to centralize data. That's great because these types of things require many people participate actively and voluntarily" (translation). **ii)** eBird was launched in 2013, and has so far identified 965 species of birds. eBird in Argentina is "developed and managed by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology at Cornell University, one of the most important ornithological institutions in the world, and locally presented recently with the support of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation of the Nation (MINCyT)" (translation).
- In Argentina, a citizen-led initiative known as Human Cognitive Engineering (HCE/IC-H), established in 2025, investigates biophysical pathways such as PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 mechanotransduction. This project utilizes open-source repositories to document Prior Art, aiming to maintain fundamental biological mechanisms as public knowledge in alignment with UNESCO 2026 Neuro-rights standards. The framework describes human physiology through General Systems Theory (GST), focusing on fascial signaling and the Grotthuss proton-jump mechanism for systemic homeostasis.

- Projects in Brazil include: **i)** Platform and mobile app 'Missions' has been developed by IBM in their São Paulo research lab with Brazil's Ministry for Environment and Innovation (BMEI). Sergio Borger, an IBM team lead in São Paulo, devised the crowdsourced approach when BMEI approached the company in 2010. They were looking for a way to create a central repository for the rainforest data. Users can upload photos of a plant species and its components, enter its characteristics (such as color and size), compare it against a catalog photo and classify it. The classification results are juried by crowdsourced ratings. **ii)** Exoss Citizen Science is a member of Astronomers Without Borders and seeks to explore the southern sky for new meteors and radiants. Users can report meteor fireballs through uploading pictures on to a webpage or by linking to YouTube. **iii)** The Information System on Brazilian Biodiversity (SiBBr) was launched in 2014 "aiming to encourage and facilitate the publication, integration, access and use of information about the biodiversity of the country." Their initial goal "was to gather 2.5 million occurrence records of species from biological collections in Brazil and abroad up to the end of 2016. It is now expected that SiBBr will reach nine million records in 2016." Andrea Portela said: "In 2016, we will begin with the citizen science. They are tools that enable anyone, without any technical knowledge, to participate. With this we will achieve greater engagement with society. People will be able to have more interaction with the platform, contribute and comment on what Brazil has." **iv)** The Brazilian Marine Megafauna Project (Iniciativa Pro Mar) is working with the European CSA towards its main goal, which is the "sensibilization of society for marine life issues" and concerns about pollution and the over-exploitation of natural resources. Having started as a project monitoring manta ray, it now extends to whale shark and educating schools and divers within the Santos area. Its social media activities include a live streaming of a citizen science course to help divers identify marine megafauna. **v)** A smartphone app called Plantix has been developed by the Leibniz Centre for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF) which helps Brazilian farmers discover crop diseases quicker and helps fight them more efficiently. Brazil is a very large agricultural exporter, but between 10 and 30% of crops fail because of disease. "The database currently includes 175 frequently occurring crop diseases and pests as well as 40,000 photos. The identification algorithm of the app improves with every image which records a success rate of over 90 per cent as of approximately 500 photos per crop disease." **vi)** In an Atlantic Ocean forest region in Brazil, an effort to map the genetic riches of soil is under way. The Drugs From Dirt initiative, based at the Rockefeller University, seeks to turn up bacteria that yield new types of antibiotics – the Brazilian region being particularly rich in potentially useful bacterial genes. Approximately a quarter of the 185 soil samples have been taken by Citizen Scientists without which the project could not run.
- In Chile citizen science projects include (some websites in Spanish): **i)** Testing new cancer therapies with scientists from the Science Foundation for Life. **ii)** Monitoring the population of the Chilean bumblebee. **iii)** Monitoring the invasive ladybird Chinita arlequín. **iv)** Collecting rain water data. **v)** Monitoring various pollinating fly populations. **vi)** Providing information and field data on the abundance and distribution of various species of rockfish. **vii)** Investigating the environmental pollution by plastic litter.

- Projects in Colombia include (some websites in Spanish): **i)** The Communications Project of the Humboldt Institute along with the Organization for Education and Environmental Protection initiated projects in the Bogotá wetlands of Cordoba and El Burro, which have a lot of biodiversity. **ii)** In the Model Forest of Risaralda, the Colombia *'proyecto de Ciencia Abierta y Colaborativa'* promotes citizen participation in research related to how the local environment is adapting to climate change. The first meeting took place in the Flora and Fauna Sanctuary Otún Quimbaya. **iii**) The Citizen Network Environmental Monitoring (CLUSTER), based in the city of Bucaramanga, seeks to engage younger students in data science, who are trained in building weather stations with open repositories based on free software and open hardware data. **iv)** The Symposium on Biodiversity has adapted the CS tool iNaturalist for use in Colombia. **v)** The Sinchi Amazonic Institute of Scientific Research seeks to encourage the development and diffusion of knowledge, values and technologies on the management of natural resources for ethnic groups in the Amazon. This research should further the use of participatory action research schemes and promoting participation communities.
- Since 2010, the Pacific Biodiversity Institute (PBI) seeks "volunteers to help identify, describe and protect wildland complexes and roadless areas in South America". The PBI "are engaged in an ambitious project with our Latin American conservation partners to map all the wildlands in South America, to evaluate their contribution to global biodiversity and to share and disseminate this information."
- In Mexico, a citizen science project has monitored rainfall data that is linked to a hydrologic payment for ecosystem services project.
- In Mexico, the Senko Lab at Arizona State university partnered with coastal gillnet fishers off of the Baja Peninsula to reduce shark and sea turtle bycatch.


## Conferences

The first Conference on Public Participation in Scientific Research was held in Portland, Oregon, in August 2012. Citizen science is now often a theme at large conferences, such as the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union.

In 2010, 2012 and 2014 there were three Citizen Cyberscience summits, organised by the Citizen Cyberscience Centre in Geneva and University College London. The 2014 summit was hosted in London and attracted over 300 participants.

In November 2015, the ETH Zürich and University of Zürich hosted an international meeting on the "Challenges and Opportunities in Citizen Science".

The first citizen science conference hosted by the Citizen Science Association was in San Jose, California, in February 2015 in partnership with the AAAS conference. The Citizen Science Association conference, CitSci 2017, was held in Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States, between 17 and 20 May 2017. The conference had more than 600 attendees. The next CitSci was in March 2019 in Raleigh, North Carolina.

The platform "Österreich forscht" hosts the annual Austrian citizen science conference since 2015.


## In popular culture

Barbara Kingsolver's 2012 novel *Flight Behaviour* looks at the effects of citizen science on a housewife in Appalachia, when her interest in butterflies brings her into contact with scientists and academics.
