---
title: "American Geophysical Union v. Texaco, Inc. (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Geophysical_Union_v._Texaco,_Inc.
domain: copyright-status-of-works-by-the-federal-government-of-the-united-states
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: copyright status of works by the federal government of the united states
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 2/2
---

## Subsequent jurisprudence

Other courts have relied on *Texaco* to support the proposition that with *Campbell*, the Supreme Court, without saying so, retreated from its earlier insistence on the primacy of the fourth factor. In *Princeton University Press v. Michigan Document Services, Inc.*, a 1996 case also involving bulk photocopying, the Sixth Circuit allowed that the Supreme Court's denial of cert in *Texaco* might constitute an endorsement of this holding even as it announced it still considered the fourth factor first among equals.

*Texaco* has guided other courts hearing similar cases covering bulk photocopying for possibly social useful ends, even with a clear profit. Both the majority and dissents in *Michigan Document*, heard *en banc* after the original appellate panel voted unanimously to do so following its reversal of the district court's finding that the defendant's claim to fair use in creating document packs for university courses was not fair use, cited the case. Judge David A. Nelson's majority opinion accepts Newman's rejection of the circularity argument regarding the licensing-fee market, while Judge James L. Ryan accepted it in that case because he believed the plaintiff publishers could not enter that market.

In 2012 the Northern District of Georgia considered *Cambridge University Press v. Becker*, a case involving academic photocopying by Georgia State University, which allowed digitized portions of works to be included in online coursepacks for students, the issue the Second Circuit had said it was not deciding in *Texaco*. The plaintiff publishers had, in arguing the first factor favored them, likened the case to *Texaco* and *Michigan Document*, but Judge Orinda D. Evans distinguished those cases as involving copying purely for commercial gain whereas in the instant case it was a nonprofit public university doing the copying. Since the university also had a relationship with the CCC, she agreed that the lost licensing revenues decided the fourth factor in the publishers' favor. Evans agreed that there was circular reasoning involved but found "no ideal solution" to the problem beyond evaluating all the factors independently, without regard to circularity.

In 2013 the American Institute of Physics invoked *Texaco* in bringing suit (again with other publishers as plaintiffs) against two law firms, one in Minneapolis and the other in Dallas, that they accused of similarly infringing unlicensed duplication of articles. Both the District of Minnesota and the Northern District of Texas rejected the comparison. The defendant firms practiced patent law, and printed the articles out not for archival research purposes, but to submit with clients' prosecutions as evidence of relevant prior art.

"The Court finds *Texaco* inapplicable here," wrote Judge Barbara M.G. Lynn when analyzing the fourth factor in the Texas case, "where the monetary gain received by the defendants for reading an article is generated from the use of the attorneys' own time and not the content of the article itself." The magistrate judge who heard the Minnesota case held in the first-factor analysis that the printing and copying was, unlike Texaco's, a transformative use: "This case is not *Texaco* ... the evidentiary character of Schwegman's copying differentiates the firm's use of the articles from the articles' original purpose."


## Analysis and commentary

Scholarly critics of *Texaco* reiterated Jacobs' arguments, primarily on the circularity and intermediate copying issues, as well as adding some of their own. Nicole Cásarez of the University of St. Thomas found the Second Circuit's approach too focused on economic factors at the expense of the broader goal of copyright protection, leaving some questions unsatisfactorily answered or unaddressed. The court should have, she wrote, followed the example of the Ninth Circuit in *Sega v. Accolade*, where copied computer code served a transitory purpose in reverse engineering that bypassed the petitioner's licensing system to create games that could be played on its platform. "[P]hotocopying by itself", she wrote, "never creates a new work of authorship, but rather only assists in its creation."

Newman's response to Jacobs' invocation of §107's preamble misread the statute, Cásarez continued: "[Its] words ... explicitly pertain to activities and not to works of authorship; otherwise, Congress would have referred to 'news articles' and 'scientific treatises' rather than 'news reporting' and 'research.'" Through that misreading, she alleged, the court had allowed the transformative use issue to be decided by economic considerations that properly remained part of the fourth-factor analysis. Like Jacobs, Cásarez felt that the "purpose and character of the use" should be evaluated in light of the possible ultimate benefit to the public, not the user.

Likewise, Cásarez argued that the court's analysis of the third and fourth factors had been driven by purely commercial considerations, as had the first factor. Texaco's argument that the publishers sold the individual articles only bundled with others in journals did should have been given greater consideration, since the main purpose of the third-factor analysis is to guide the consideration of market impact, she wrote, and "[t]herefore, it seems manifestly unfair to ignore whether the copyrighted work was separately marketed as opposed to being available for purchase only within the collective work." It was not relevant whether Texaco had purchased a license, since by doing so it was assumed to have already purchased the original work. Further, "[it] should have recognized that although Dr. Chickering copied the complete articles as a preliminary step in his research, ultimately he would use very little of the original copyrighted works." The court was correct that the third factor favored the publishers, but should have assigned that less importance, Cásarez concluded.

Cásarez also wrote that the majority had gotten the distinction it drew between *Sony* and the instant case wrong. The customers recording TV shows to watch them later, at more opportune times were likely to record them only once and then later tape over them, while researchers kept articles they had photocopied, even after drawing on them for research, until they needed to clear space in their files. Cásarez called it "apples and oranges" to suggest that the hundreds of copies made by Texaco constituted greater potential infringement than the many home copies of previously broadcast programs; it was, to her, the other way around as millions of VCR users making one copy amounted to far more copies (which neither party resold). She also noted that the viewers taping programs had gotten them for free while Texaco had already paid for its subscriptions.

To Cásarez, the case called for Congress to supplement fair use with a personal-use exemption. She noted that the language of the amended decision explicitly excludes such use from its scope, and asked "does (or should) personal copying of copyrighted material enjoy favored status under the copyright law, either as a separate exemption or as part of fair use?; and if so, (2) under what circumstances does (or should) the personal use exemption apply?" Decisions like *Texaco*, Cásarez argued, resulted from the relative silence of the law on these questions, which she attributed to Congress having primarily consulted with publishers and other industry groups when drafting the 1976 Act. "If [it] is read to require an individual user to purchase a license or pay a royalty before he or she can duplicate a copyrighted article for personal use, then the copyright law is being applied not to enhance but rather to inhibit that user's ability to learn", she wrote. A personal-use exemption would deal with that better than fair use, which Cásarez said has been judged and codified with commercial reuse in mind.

In the *Georgia Law Review*, Karen Still echoed many of Cásarez's concerns, particularly regarding the first and fourth factors, calling the court's analysis "overbroad and outcome-oriented", saying it applied the preamble to §107 more narrowly than Congress intended and misinterpreted *Williams & Wilkins* on the "reasonable and customary" nature of bulk photocopying. She further charged that *Texaco* also unconstitutionally expanded the publishers' monopoly on copyright, falsely treating its mandate as favoring profit for publishers over the public good, and also intruded on the powers of the legislative branch by effectively mandating compulsory licensing even as it noted that doing so would properly be Congress's task.

Looking back on *Texaco* in 2007, commentators at William & Mary focused on decisions that cited both it and *Campbell* to survey the state of courts' understanding of those precedents in ruling on fair use. The authors agreed with Jacobs and other critics that the circularity of the market analysis tended to favor plaintiffs in fourth-factor analyses, calling it the "can-pay/should-pay" doctrine, since if the court found that the slightest market existed, it invariably found market impact in the alleged infringement. This ended in 2006 with *Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley, Ltd.* where the plaintiff had asserted market harm over unlicensed reproductions of posters and tickets to past Grateful Dead concerts used in the defendant's history of the band. The court had held the reuse transformative since the images were reduced in size and used to recount the band's history rather than as artistic works, distinguishing the case from *Texaco* where there was no transformation and holding that the archives could not pre-empt markets for transformative derivative works merely by entering them as they could have with non-transformative works.,
