---
title: "2025 German federal election (part 3/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2025_German_federal_election
domain: andreas-scheuer
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: andreas scheuer
fetched: 2026-07-04
part: 3/3
---

## Government formation

| Possible majorities in the Bundestag | Seats |
|---|---|
| **Total seats** | **630** |
| ***Two-thirds majority (420 or more seats)*** |   |
| CDU/CSU-AfD-Greens-Linke | 509 |
| CDU/CSU-SPD-Greens-Linke | 477 |
| ***Absolute majority (316 or more seats)*** |   |
| CDU/CSU-SPD-Greens | 413 |
| CDU/CSU-AfD | 360 |
| CDU/CSU-Greens-Linke | 357 |
| CDU/CSU-SPD | 328 |
| ***No majority (315 or fewer seats)*** |   |
| CDU/CSU-Greens | 293 |
| SPD-Greens-Linke | 269 |

With all major parties rejecting to cooperate with the AfD, the CDU/CSU reached out to SPD, as well as the Greens and Left. This "firewall" was shown in the first parliament session: while every faction has a confirmed right to have one member act as proxy to the speaker, the President of the Bundestag, only those suggested by CDU, CSU, SPD, Greens and Left were actually elected. The AfD candidate was rejected once again, in three rounds, like all of several dozen candidates since 2017. The failure of the FDP and BSW to reach the 5 per cent threshold in the Bundestag meant that these two parties did not receive seats in the new Bundestag.

In total, about 14% of votes were not represented, and the seats were distributed among other parties. Thus, CDU/CSU plus SPD received 52% of seats despite receiving only 45% of the popular vote. Although the CDU/CSU emerged as the strongest party group, it fell far short of an absolute majority. (The only time a party group obtained an absolute majority was in 1957.) As usual, further coalition negotiations were necessary. The only possible majorities in the Bundestag involving just two groups would be the ones involving the CDU/CSU and either the SPD or, just mathematically, the "firewalled" AfD.

Since Friedrich Merz had publicly ruled out a coalition with the AfD on repeated occasions before and after the election, the only coalition which was considered was one between the centre-right CDU/CSU and the centre-left SPD. The SPD under the leadership of co-party leader Lars Klingbeil agreed to the talks. The decision to start the talks immediately was motivated by the desire of both parties to find a solution to pressing challenges such as the stagnating German economy, the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine and concerns about the actions of US President Donald Trump that are undermining transatlantic relations, to avoid prolonged political uncertainty.

Because the CDU/CSU and SPD were always the strongest parties until this election, a coalition of the two is conventionally known as a "grand coalition" (*Große Koalition*, Groko). Such a coalition has already existed four times in Germany (Kiesinger cabinet in the 1960s, and since 2005 also in the first, third, and fourth Merkel cabinets), most recently from 2017 until 2021 under Chancellor Angela Merkel, when the Jamaica coalition negotiations between the CDU, Greens, and FDP failed and a CDU-led grand coalition with SPD was formed instead. The Grand Coalitions often only materialised when other coalitions were not possible.

### Beginning of exploratory talks

The CDU team included Friedrich Merz and other high-ranking officials such as CSU leader Markus Söder, CDU General Secretary Carsten Linnemann and CDU parliamentary group leader Thorsten Frei, CSU parliamentary group leader Alexander Dobrindt, the Saxon Minister President Michael Kretschmer, the deputy chairwoman of the CDU Karin Prien and CSU politician Dorothee Bär. The SPD delegation was made up of important personalities such as Defence Minister Boris Pistorius and Labour Minister Hubertus Heil, as well as the Secretary General Matthias Miersch, Bundestag President Bärbel Bas, the two Minister Presidents Manuela Schwesig and Anke Rehlinger, and the head of the SPD in North Rhine-Westphalia Achim Post.

Both sides had originally wanted the talks not to commence until 5 March, in view of the state election in Hamburg on 2 March, as well as Carnival (peaking 3 March), which is very popular in some parts of Germany. Subsequently however, Klingbeil and Merz agreed to an early start in their talks, so exploratory talks between the two parties began in Berlin on 28 February 2025, five days after the election. Merz had set himself the target of forming a coalition by Easter. From the outset, there were differences of opinion between the CDU and SPD on the reform of the debt brake (which limited the German budget deficit to 0.35% of GDP per year), a possible tax reform, the minimum tax reform, the minimum wage, the citizen's income, immigration and a new right to vote. Following the events at the White House involving American president Donald Trump and Ukrainian president Vlodomyr Zelenskyy on 28 February, exploratory talks were further intensified, as both parties recognised the need for a government capable of acting quickly in Europe's largest economy after Trump suspended US military aid for Ukraine. The parties met again on 3 March.

### Debt brake agreement

On the evening of 4 March, after it had already become apparent several times over the course of the previous days, it was made public that the CDU/CSU and SPD had reached an agreement on the debt ceiling. According to the draft, there were plans to change the Basic Law (German constitution) in order to exclude defence expenditure of over 1% of GDP and a second special fund, this time not for defence as in 2022, but for infrastructure, in the amount of 500 billion euros. (Merz had ruled out a reform of the debt brake and additional debt during the election campaign.)

Since the proposals would require changes to the Basic Law, they would require approval by a two-thirds majority in both the Bundestag and the Bundesrat; however, in the newly elected, incoming Bundestag, parties opposed to these changes (the far-right AfD and The Left) together held a blocking minority of more than one third of the members. The prospective coalition partners (CDU/CSU and SPD) therefore decided to attempt to pass the legislation through the outgoing 20th Bundestag (elected in 2021), where they could reach the necessary majority if either Greens or FDP voted in favour. Therefore the parties requested two special sessions on the proposed constitutional changes (12 and 18 March). According to Article 39 (2) of the Basic Law, an outgoing Bundestag is capable of acting until the inauguration of the newly elected parliament, no later than the 30th day after the election. An outgoing Bundestag had decided on urgent matters before but never on changes to the Basic Law, nor had this previously been done by a parliament prematurely dissolved.

On 8 March, both sides started of coalition negotiations and set out their initial common positions in a paper. The plans were criticised by the AfD, which saw it as "socialism". The FDP viewed it as "ideologised climate policy". The Greens and The Left criticised omissions in the social sphere, and the BSW saw it as "a red carpet rolled out for the AfD to enter the Chancellery in 2029". Economists also criticised the paper. On 10 March, the Greens, on whose approval the CDU and SPD were reliant on for their plans, announced that they would not approve the project. Instead, they introduced their own draft bill in the Bundestag which, among other things, called for the debt brake to be applied not only to defence, but also for civil defence and cyber security at 1% of GDP. They also saw the special funds for infrastructure as a way for the SPD and CDU/CSU to finance their election campaign promises, instead of actual infrastructure. Nevertheless, they were open to talks. At the same time, The Left and AfD took their case to the Federal Constitutional Court to appeal against the special sessions and the constitutional amendments in the "old" Bundestag as they felt their rights as members of parliament had been violated. The requests for an interim injunction were rejected by the Federal Constitutional Court on 14 March.

The first of the two special Bundestag sessions was then held on 12 March. The SPD and CDU/CSU motions, as well as those of the Greens and the FDP, were referred to the relevant committees after a long debate. On the same day, the minister presidents of the federal states in Berlin called for speed. In the meantime, it was uncertain whether the necessary majority in the Bundesrat existed, as it was reported that the Free Voters in Bavaria and the BSW in Brandenburg and Thuringia would not vote in favour of the change. On 13 March, it was announced that the Greens, CDU, and SPD had reached an agreement. According to the compromise, 100 billion of the 500 billion special funds for infrastructure will go towards climate protection. Moreover, spending on civil defence, cyber security, intelligence services and aid to countries attacked in violation of international law will all be excluded from the debt brake.

On 16 March, the Bundestag Budget Committee, which is primarily responsible for motion to amend the Basic Law on debt matters, met. It dealt with the motions from the CDU/CSU and SPD, the Greens, and the FDP. In its recommendation for a resolution, the committee proposed the already-agreed legislative text of the CDU/CSU, SPD, and Greens for a vote. The FDP's draft bill was rejected. On 17 March, the Federal Constitutional Court published several decisions on urgent petitions submitted by the AfD, The Left and the FDP or their MPs. The plaintiffs wanted the court to declare that the planning of the legislative procedure violated the plaintiffs' rights as members of parliament, as the speed of implementation did not do justice to the complexity of the matter. This would have halted the legislative process. The court dismissed the applications in summary proceedings as the potential immediate harm could not be sufficiently demonstrated. The decision in the main proceedings is still pending.

| Ballot → | 18 March 2025 |   |
|---|---|---|
| Required majority → | 489 out of 718 |   |
|   | Yes • SPD (205)• CDU/CSU (193)• Greens (112)• SSW (1)• Independent (1) | 512 / 718 |
|   | No • FDP (87)• AfD (73)• The Left (28)• BSW (9)• Independent (6)• CDU/CSU (1)• Greens (1)• SPD (1) | 206 / 718 |
|   | Abstentions | 0 / 718 |
|   | Absentees • Greens (4)• AfD (3)• FDP (3)• CDU/CSU (2)• BSW (1)• Independent (1)• SPD (1) | 15 / 733 |
| Result → | Approved (check)Y |   |
| Sources |   |   |

On 18 March, the Bundestag met for its second special session. Before debate began, Bundestag President Bärbel Bas (SPD) recalled the first free election in the GDR on 18 March 1990, after which the Bundestag rejected several motions to suspend the Rules of Procedure tabled by the FDP and the AfD. The debate centred not only on the SPD, CDU/CSU, and Greens' bill, but also on that of the FDP and a motion for a resolution by the BSW entitled "No to war-mongering – yes to diplomacy and disarmament".

The SPD parliamentary group leader Lars Klingbeil called it a "historic decision" for Germany and Europe. CDU/CSU leader Friedrich Merz said a "paradigm shift in defence policy" was needed to continue to guarantee Europe's security. Green parliamentary group leader Britta Haßelmann accused Merz of partisan tactics, as he had ruled out debt during the election campaign. Nevertheless, she was pleased with the compromise. The FDP party leader Christian Lindner accused the new government of "unrestrained debt creation". The AfD and The Left also criticised Merz and the legislative process.

In the end, the majority of the CDU/CSU, SPD and Greens voted in favour of the motion, with a total of 512 MPs voting in favour and 212 against. The amendment to the Basic Law was thus passed. The vote was hailed as a victory for Friedrich Merz and a significant step toward changing the Basic Law to allow for greater flexibility in defence and infrastructure spending. With the Bundestag's approval by a two-thirds majority, the proposed changes moves to the Bundesrat, where it requires approval by a two-thirds majority for full enactment. NATO Secretary General Mark Rutte and EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen welcomed the decision.

Also on 18 March, the Free Voters, who were in government with the CSU in Bavaria, announced that they would vote in favour of the law in the Bundesrat. As such, a two-thirds majority in the Bundesrat was considered certain. On 21 March, the Bundesrat voted in favour of the amendment 53-16, passing the two-thirds threshold to become law. The states of Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, and Rhineland-Palatinate all abstained from voting, which was counted as voting in opposition.

In several states (North Rhine-Westphalia, Baden-Württemberg, Bremen, and Hesse), the FDP state parliamentary groups announced that they would appeal to the state constitutional courts against their state governments' approval of the law. The applications were all rejected as they were inadmissible. The reasonings were that the state government would responsible for representing and voting for a state in the Bundesrat, which meant that it alone could decide how to vote; and that individual parliamentary groups were not authorised to assert the rights of a state parliament; only the state parliament itself could do so.

On 21 March, the Federal Constitutional Court dismissed another urgent application by the AfD to prevent the Bundesrat from meeting. The session was opened by Bundesrat President Rehlinger with a memorial speech in honour of the late Bundesrat President and Minister President Bernhard Vogel. The meeting then moved directly to the planned legislative amendments: In his speech, Baden-Württemberg's Minister President Winfried Kretschmann praised the extension of the 500 billion infrastructure package to include climate protection. He said: "More climate protection is a core task of this century." Nevertheless, he lamented a "feeling of disruption" due to the rapid legislative process.

| Ballot → | 21 March 2025 |   |
|---|---|---|
| Required majority → | 46 of 69 |   |
|   | Yes •     Baden-Württemberg (6) •     Bavaria (6) •     Berlin (4) •       Bremen (3) •     Hamburg (3) •     Hesse (5) •     Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (3) •     Lower Saxony (6) •     North Rhine-Westphailia (6) •   Saarland (3) •     Saxony (4) •     Schleswig-Holstein (4) | 53 / 69 |
|   | **No** | 0 / 69 |
|   | Abstentions •     Brandenburg (4) •       Rhineland-Palatinate (4) •       Saxony-Anhalt (4) •       Thuringia (4) | 16 / 69 |
| Result → | Approved (check)Y |   |
|   |   |   |

Bavaria's Minister President Markus Söder called for the money from the infrastructure package to be distributed and utilised sensibly. He said it is "not a self-service shop for any projects". He also called for a long-term repayment plan. Regardless of party affiliation, almost all speakers welcomed the easing of the debt brake for the federal states and called on the federal government to significantly speed up the planning and award procedures for contracts from the infrastructure package and to quickly pass the necessary implementation laws in order to eliminate the "ailing infrastructure" and the "investment backlog" (both terms used by several speakers) as quickly as possible. Bremen's head of government Andreas Bovenschulte said: "What use is the most beautiful special fund if we can't manage it in practice?"

In the end, all federal states except Brandenburg, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia (which abstained) voted in favour. The four states that abstained did so due to disagreement between the state government coalition partners. While the CDU and SPD each wanted approval, the BSW and FDP wanted the proposal to be rejected. When a state's own government could not reach consensus, the state would abstain. President Frank-Walter Steinmeier signed the law on 22 March.

### Grand coalition agreement

With the announcement of the exploratory paper by the CDU/CSU and SPD on 8 March 2025, both parties indicated that they wanted to start coalition negotiations quickly. On 13 March the working groups began their work after an initial meeting between the party executive committees and their leaders. Each working group consisted of six representatives from the CDU, three from the CSU, and seven from the SPD. There were 16 working groups in total, as well as a steering group that dealt with the working methods of the government and parliamentary groups, electoral law and the responsibilities of the working groups in the event of overlaps.

According to a publicly released handout on the coalition negotiations by the party leaders, there were strict guidelines regarding publicity; for example, there were to be “no statements, no press conferences, no communication of interim results, no selfies, etc.”.

By 24 March at the latest, all working groups had presented the final papers on their topics after some difficult debates. Although these were also supposed to be kept secret, they were all leaked relatively quickly. As could be seen from the papers, the CDU/CSU and SPD reached agreement on certain points, but many problems, especially major ones, were written into the final papers without agreement, in square brackets, in which the respective demands were included. According to media reports, the negotiators in the finance working group in particular were far apart and, judging by the final paper, were only able to agree on a few points. The parties also disagreed on the digital ministry demanded by Friedrich Merz. Nevertheless, both sides were optimistic that the new government would be formed.

This was followed by the second, three-day “drafting phase”, during which the parties reviewed and compiled the results of the negotiations for themselves before the final round of negotiations began on 28 March in the so-called 19-party round. In addition to the party leaders, it also included CDU secretary general Carsten Linnemann and Defense Minister Boris Pistorius. The aim of these negotiations is the coalition agreement, which the coalition partners want to have in place by Easter. Although this goal was already very ambitious at the time, the party leaders were confident. Deputy CDU chairwoman and later Education Minister Karin Prien said that there was still a lot of time before Easter. "Our country needs a new government. But we will not allow ourselves to be pressured into bad results, we want good results for our country."

Major disagreements that needed to be resolved included financial and tax policy, migration and defense.

After sometimes lengthy negotiations, the party executives of the CDU, CSU, and SPD jointly announced their coalition agreement on 9 April 2025. At the presentation, Chancellor-designate Friedrich Merz described the coalition agreement as a strong signal to citizens and Europe. The political center is capable of solving the country's problems. During the negotiations, a relationship of trust was established with the SPD leaders Saskia Esken and Lars Klingbeil. Merz expects the new federal government to be able to get to work at the beginning of May. On 11 April, it was agreed that Merz would be elected chancellor on 6 May. SPD leader Lars Klingbeil emphasized that savings would create leeway for project agreements. Much is subject to funding. That is why the draft of the coalition agreement often speaks of “want”, not “will”. But, according to Klingbeil, the coalition agreement offers the potential for Germany to emerge stronger from this period.

Naturally, the opposition strongly criticized the coalition agreement. Opposition leader Alice Weidel (AfD) described it as a “document of capitulation”. In her opinion, the paper “bears the signature of the election loser SPD throughout". The CDU/CSU had "bamboozled and lied to the citizens with false election promises" and not a single election promise had been kept. In addition, the government program does not address the important challenges facing the country. The Greens criticized the coalition agreement as a major disappointment: they asserted that the coalition agreement contained nothing for people in particular, nor did it address social issues or education. "This coalition has money like hay, but ideas like straw," explained Green co-leader Brantner. The Left Party, meanwhile, described the coalition agreement as a "document of ignorance towards hard-working people and the major challenges of our time". FDP politician Christian Dürr also criticized the plans of the CDU/CSU and SPD. According to Dürr, Germany will be ruled by despondency in the future and the promised policy change will not materialize. BSW Chairwoman Sahra Wagenknecht explained that the coalition agreement does not provide an answer to the economic crisis and trade war. As a result, the coalition would further strengthen the AfD.

In order for the coalition to begin its work, the parties had to agree to the terms of the coalition agreement. The CSU did this on 10 April with a unanimous decision by the party executive as well as the CSU regional group in the Bundestag and the Bavarian CSU state parliamentary group. On 28 April the CDU federal committee also voted in favor with an “overwhelming majority”, according to the chairman of the meeting and Saxony's Minister President Michael Kretschmer. On the same day, the CDU announced its ministers. For the SPD, as always, the party base was allowed to decide on participation in the coalition. A good 358,000 party members were called upon to cast their votes by 29 April. The youth organization of the SPD, the Jusos, announced before the vote that they wanted to speak out against the agreement, as they did not see central election promises fulfilled. Nevertheless, according to the SPD, 84.6% of those who voted were in favor of the coalition agreement and 15.4% against; the majority was thus higher than in the votes on the grand coalitions in 2013 (76%) and 2018 (66%). At just under 56%, the turnout was above the required 20%. On 5 May the SPD then also announced its ministers before the coalition agreement was signed on the same day.

On the same day, former Chancellor Olaf Scholz was bid farewell with military honors.

### Chancellor election

After the party leaders of the CDU, CSU and SPD signed their coalition agreement, President Frank-Walter Steinmeier officially proposed Friedrich Merz to Bundestag President Julia Klöckner for election as Chancellor, which was put to the vote the next day by secret ballot.

Although the CDU/CSU and SPD had 328 of 630 members of the Bundestag, in the first round of voting Merz received only 310 votes, below the required 316. This was the first time this happened in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany. After the election result was announced, the session was interrupted.

According to Article 63 (3) of the Basic Law, the election of the Chancellor was now in the second phase: within a period of 14 days, i.e. until 20 May, a quarter of the members of the Bundestag could nominate a candidate for election as Federal Chancellor. The number of ballots is not predetermined and is theoretically unlimited. If a candidate is elected in one of these ballots, the President must appoint him or her.

Surprised by his failure to win enough votes, Merz's coalition asked the parliament's legal department whether a second vote could be held the same day. During the adjournment of the session, the factions of the Bundestag discussed a second round of voting. All parliamentary groups agreed that the second round of voting should take place on 6 May. The CDU/CSU and SPD parliamentary groups once again put forward Friedrich Merz as their candidate. He was elected in the second round of voting. He was then appointed Chancellor by President Frank-Walter Steinmeier and sworn in to the Bundestag. The federal ministers were then appointed by Federal President Steinmeier and then sworn in by the Bundestag.
