---
title: "33rd Alabama Infantry Regiment (part 2/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/33rd_Regiment_Alabama_Infantry
domain: eugene-allen-smith
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: eugene allen smith
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 2/3
---

## Chattanooga to Ringgold Gap

### The Siege of Chattanooga

Following the debacle at Chickamauga and his subsequent failure to prevent the routed Union forces from escaping to Chattanooga, Bragg placed that city under siege after hearing that his foes had just six days of food remaining. Entrenching his forces atop Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge overlooking the city and the Tennessee River, Bragg soon learned that he would be facing a new opponent: Ulysses S. Grant. Fresh from his victory at Vicksburg, Grant had been ordered to take command of all Federal forces in the region; his first action upon arriving was to remove Rosecrans and replace him with George Thomas, who had saved the Union army at Chickamauga. With 50,000 new reinforcements to assist him, Grant opened a so-called "Cracker Line" to the starving Federals in the city at the Battle of Brown's Ferry; here the 15th Alabama, another regiment recruited from the same part of the state as the 33rd, was driven from the field after being outnumbered and overwhelmed by attacking Federals.

The 33rd Alabama dug in on the west end of Missionary Ridge on November 22, behind a vineyard at its base. Rifle pits were built, and guards rotated there every 24 hours; those not on guard duty set to work clearing all the vegetation from the west slope of the ridge, chopping the trees so that the tops fell toward Chattanooga, creating a natural barrier of tangled tree limbs. Matthews reports that the removal of these trees allowed the cold autumn breezes to chill the troops on the ridge, since the Southerners had nothing but small tents to break the wind. He reports gazing in wonder at the valley below him, where the campfires of thousands of Federal soldiers "[showed] picturesquely at night." A large siege gun was hauled up Lookout Mountain to shell the Union camps and Chattanooga; Matthews recalled that "... at the flash of the gun at night, some soldiers attracted out attention by yelling and watching the long flight and bursting of the shells, [which] were especially attractive to us while standing, squatting or sitting around our camp fires." He says that rations, which had heretofore been plentiful, were "short" during this time.

At this point, Bragg chose to divide his army: Longstreet's 4,000 soldiers were ordered to move north to Knoxville to deal with a separate Federal force there under Ambrose Burnside. On November 22, he ordered General Cleburne to take his division, including the 33rd Alabama, together with another division under General Simon B. Buckner to assist. Seeing movement in the Southern lines, General Grant ordered Federal forces to attack near a small rise called Orchard Knob; their success, though limited in scope, led Bragg to recall Cleburne (who was in the process of loading his troops onto their trains); he took up a position just behind his former works which had been occupied by other Southerners after their departure the day before.

### Holding Tunnel Hill

Having successfully lifted the Siege of Chattanooga, General Grant now resolved on a double envelopment of Bragg's army. Major General William T. Sherman was ordered to attack with 20,000 men from the north along Missionary Ridge, while Major General Joseph Hooker was directed to attack from the south along Lookout Mountain, overwhelm the Southern forces there, then continue on to cut off Bragg's retreat while Sherman and Thomas pummeled him from the north and west. The contest kicked off on the morning of November 24, as Hooker drove Confederate forces from Lookout Mountain in the so-called "Battle Above the Clouds," while Sherman crossed the Tennessee River and took up positions along what he thought was the far edge of Missionary Ridge—only to learn that he had occupied a nearby hill, called Billy Goat Hill, instead. The 33rd Alabama, entrenched atop the south end of Missionary Ridge near Bragg's headquarters, heard the sounds of battle on Lookout Mountain, but could not see the action due to a dense fog that had enveloped it.

Realizing that his right flank was vulnerable to Sherman's impending attack, Bragg ordered Cleburne at 2pm to double-time from the southern to the northernmost portion of his line—just as he had done at Chickamauga—and take up a new position opposite Sherman at a place called "Tunnel Hill," where a tunnel of the East Tennessee and Georgia railroad passed through Missionary Ridge. Lowrey's brigade, including the 33rd, dug in to the south of the tunnel, but "only skirmishing" took place on that day.

Ordered to attack at dawn on November 25, General Sherman delayed until about 7am, when he sent his skirmishers forward. The real attack did not begin until sometime between 10 and 10:30 am. With other units moving onto the ridge to his left, Cleburne shifted Lowrey's Brigade to a spur projecting from the ridge, just north of the tunnel. Advancing into murderous fire, the Federals came to within eighty yards of the Southern positions before a furious Confederate counterattack forced them back, leading Sherman to call off the attack. Cleburne indicated that the brunt of the battle was borne by Smith's Texas Brigade and three Arkansas regiments in Gowan's Brigade; the 33rd Alabama saw "heavy skirmishing," but did not play a major role since the Federals never approached closer than 100-200 yards to their sector of the line. Cleburne's men had done their job, capturing eight enemy flags and 500 prisoners.

Just then, disaster struck. Further south along the center of Bragg's line, Federal troops under General Thomas smashed through Confederate positions at the base of the ridge, sweeping up the hill and driving Bragg's men before them. With his army disintegrating before his eyes, Bragg ordered Cleburne to hold the Federals off long enough to let the rest of his men escape. The 33rd Alabama attacked approaching skirmishers in the gathering darkness, allowing the remainder of Bragg's army to cross Chickamauga Creek to the east and retreat into Georgia. Since his division had held more-or-less together during the rout, Cleburne now found his regiments—including the 33rd Alabama—serving as the rearguard of the Army of Tennessee.

### Ringgold Gap—the "wall of fire"

As his army continued to retreat, General Bragg became concerned by the deep mud slowing his supply trains as he passed through the mountains near the town of Ringgold. Fearful that pursuing Federals would catch up and destroy them—and with them, his army—Bragg ordered Cleburne to "hold this position at all hazards." The 33rd Alabama crossed the waist-deep, icy Chickamauga Creek on November 27 stripped from the waist down, "as the cold wind was stinging our exposed anatomy." Finding hot ashes from other regiments' campfires, the Alabamians dried themselves and put their clothes back on, then slept beside the creek bank on the frozen ground. As the rest of their division moved on the next day, the 33rd was left with elements of the 45th Alabama and some of Joseph Wheeler's cavalry to guard the creek against the oncoming Federals. Advance Federal elements skirmished with them as the 33rd and Wheeler's Cavalry slowly backtracked toward Ringgold Gap, turning several times to fire, retreating a short distance, then turning to fire again.

Meanwhile, in the gap itself, Cleburne deployed his division in the face of the oncoming Federals. With barely 4,000 men and only two cannon to hold off Joseph Hooker's 16,000 attacking troops, Cleburne arranged his troops across both sides of the narrow pass, ordering them to conceal themselves from view and wait for his signal. Thirty minutes later the 33rd and their friends finally backed into the gap; Matthews reports that the other regiments had done such a good job of concealing themselves that he and his friends never noticed them until they had passed their positions. The 33rd was ordered to take its place with the rest of their brigade in the center atop White Oak Ridge, on the pass's northern side. They arrived just in time; one witness of the battle later said: "two minutes [more] would have been too late."

When Hooker's lead elements entered the mountain pass, Cleburne allowed them to get to within fifty yards of his men before ordering them to open fire. Reeling from the first volleys, the astonished Federals fell back, but quickly regrouped and mounted one furious counterattack after another, seeking first to turn Cleburne's right flank (where the 33rd Alabama was), then his left. Each renewed assault ran into a withering Confederate response, described by one history as "a wall of fire;" one of Cleburne's regiments exhausted its ammunition, and resorted to throwing rocks before the reserve came up and relieved them. Ringgold Gap became a slaughterhouse over the next four hours as Hooker fed regiment after regiment into the fray, only to see each thrown back with severe losses; Private Sam Watkins of the 1st Tennessee Infantry described the gap as having "the appearance of a roof of a house, shingled with dead Yankees ... From the foot to the top of the hill was covered with the slain, all lying on their faces ... The ground was piled with dead Yankees; they were lying in heaps." Once his columns had reached safety further south in Dalton, Bragg ordered Cleburne to pull back; he withdrew his men, and Hooker took possession of the pass around 2 PM. In the midst of all the carnage, the 33rd Alabama had lost only one man; their division as a whole had lost only twenty killed and 201 wounded, while holding off a Federal force four times their number for nearly five hours.

At Ringgold Gap, Cleburne and his men became the stuff of legend; the entire division received the Thanks of the Confederate Congress for their performance at this engagement. But the war was far from over, as the Alabamians and their friends soon learned.


## The savage waltz

### Wintering in Georgia

Having safely withdrawn to Dalton, Georgia, General Bragg directed Cleburne to camp at nearby Tunnel Hill, a town bearing the same name as the spot he had defended atop Missionary Ridge. Private Matthews reports that the 33rd Alabama was given "some cabins ... above the tunnel ... some were of round oak poles, others of split oak log, their cracks daubed with clay." Captured shelter halves were used as doors, and the men wintered there as best they could. He writes that those who died here were buried nearby; the regiment accompanied them to their final resting place "with arms [rifles] reversed, and sounded taps; however, [we] did not always fire blank cartridges from our guns, for fear of exciting other sick men in camp." Though they worried about the nearly worthless currency they were being paid in, "there was not as much complaint as one might suppose, as all realized that the [Confederate] Government was doing all it could for us." Matthews blamed "hospital rats" for most of the grumbling, and observed that troops in these winter quarters played cards, dominoes, dice or keno; those who had a dollar, said he, could go to minstrel shows. Not everyone in the camp had the best interests of their comrades at heart: "two or more sharpers," said he, accosted soldiers doing various chores and seek to con them out of their earnings. One regiment was assigned to guard duty every day; whenever the 33rd Alabama drew this duty, they packed up their gear and marched a mile or so to the front lines, leaving behind their sick and a guard over their other property.

On December 2, 1863, The 33rd Alabama and their comrades in the Army of Tennessee learned that they were getting a new commander: Braxton Bragg, who had led the army since the Kentucky Campaign, had resigned his position. General Hardee was given temporary charge of the force, but on December 27 General Joseph Johnston, a veteran leader who proved popular with many of his troops, took command.

### Dalton

With Chattanooga safe and the Confederates retreating, General Grant sent Sherman to Mississippi, against the Confederate rail center in Meridian. Learning of this move, Johnston ordered two divisions of his army, including Cleburne's, to go to the aid of their compatriots in that state. This, in turn, led General Thomas to launch a series of probing attacks along Johnston's lines at Dalton, where he quickly learned that the new Confederate commander was someone to be reckoned with. The 33rd Alabama had proceeded as far as West Point, Alabama, when they were recalled to Dalton. Instead of returning to Tunnel Hill, they were ordered into camp along a creek east of town, where they were put to work digging trenches between that point and their old campsite on the hill. A new flag was presented to the regiment with the words: "Perryville", "Murfreesboro", "Chickamauga" and "Ringgold Gap" embroidered on it, together with an oval-shaped disc in the center containing "33 ALA." With the Federals having retreated temporarily, life at Dalton returned to normal—at least for the time being. Rifle practices were held, with targets set up at various distances up to two-hundred yards, and a "sham battle" was fought using blank cartridges.

### Rocky Face Ridge

West of Dalton, Johnston entrenched a large portion of his army along the crest of Rocky Face Ridge, a rugged mountain extending north-to-south that was pierced by passes at Buzzard Roost Gap, Dug Gap and Snake Creek Gap. Sherman had returned to Georgia after winning a victory at Meridian; here he was given command of a new Federal force known as the Military Division of the Mississippi, consisting of three armies totaling 98,500 men. Johnston, for his part, had 50,000 men at this time. When part of Sherman's army passed through undefended Snake Creek Gap toward Resaca in the Confederate rear, the 33rd Alabama and other units were sent to stop them. Ordered to assault a height near the gap, the 33rd drove the Federals from the ridge, then drove off fierce counterattacks throughout the day. Some soldiers threw rocks at their enemies, while others pried large boulders loose and rolled them down the hill onto the attacking Northerners, who finally withdrew. All these efforts went for naught, however, as Sherman ultimately flanked the "Georgia Gibraltar" and forced Johnston to withdraw toward Resaca.

### Fire and maneuver

Following their retreat from Rocky Face Ridge, Johnston's Army of Tennessee engaged in a war of fight-and-get-flanked, in which Johnston first dug in at some defensible location, whereupon Sherman launched diversionary attacks on his smaller force, while flanking the Confederates elsewhere. At Resaca the 33rd Alabama was deployed with the rest of Hardee's Corps along Camp Creek, northwest of town; a series of Federal attacks on their lines were largely repulsed, until Sherman was able to flank Johnston and force him to retreat yet again. Additional battles at Adairsville and New Hope—though the latter was a Confederate victory—did nothing to change the strategic situation, as Sherman inched closer and closer to Atlanta. Moving into the Dallas area on May 26, the Federals attacked Johnston's right flank at Pickett's Mill on May 27.

### Pickett's Mill

Determined to outflank Johnston's latest defensive position in the Allatoona Pass, Sherman moved to the southwest, intending to circle around Allatoona and cut off Johnston's retreat. But Johnston beat him to the punch, pulling back and moving toward Dallas. After a clash at New Hope Church stopped the Federal advance, both sides rushed additional troops into the area; among them was Cleyburne's Division, which deployed on the far right flank of the Southern army in densely wooded terrain with Lowrey's Brigade (including the 33rd Alabama) in reserve on its left. Opposite them were three Federal divisions belonging to Major Generals Thomas J. Wood, Jacob D. Cox and Milo S. Hascall; the overall plan was for Sherman's army to attack the Confederate right flank. For this fight, the 33rd mustered 525 men present for duty, with the number of "effectives" rated at 493.

The battle began at 7:00 am, when Cleburne sent Govan's Arkansas Brigade forward in a reconnaissance in force against the Federal left flank. Haskell's men quickly engaged the Southerners, while other Federal forces prepared to counterattack. Just as Cleburne ordered Govan's men to return to their original lines, they were attacked by two Federal divisions led by General Oliver O. Howard, who had swung out beyond the Federal left flank, seeking to turn the Confederate right. Cleburne extended his division in that direction toward a wheatfield; he also ordered his pioneers to rapidly construct trails to facilitate movement of men and supplies between his brigades. Incredibly, the Federal commander, General Howard, only ordered a single brigade to attack, even though six were available to him. This unit quickly became separated amid thick underbrush and rugged terrain, with catastrophic results. Additional Federal units were eventually sent forward, but since they got no support from other units on their line, Cleyburne was free to order Lowrey's Brigade—including the 33rd Alabama—to move to Govan's assistance. Lowrey's men arrived around 5:30, with the 33rd in the lead. Each regiment was ordered to clear the one in front of it, then turn left and come onto line.

Confederate General John H. Kelly now came up, and ordered two Arkansas regiments to the left of the 33rd to charge the Federals; the 33rd Alabama chose to charge with them, with seven companies accompanying the Arkansas troops, and the other four veering off into a wooded hollow to the right. The Federals (belonging to the 5th Kentucky) attempted to regroup, but were hit by the 33rd's four right companies, who engaged them briefly in a cornfield before retreating to the safety of the woods, where they continued to fire on the Federals. General Lowrey arrived at this time, personally rallying the 33rd by riding back and forth among them on his horse 'Rebel' as the battle raged around him. The Federals broke and ran, then regrouped, with both sides continuing to blaze away at each other across the cornfield in the gathering twilight. Around 10:00 pm, a night charge by a nearby Confederate brigade under Hiram B. Granbury pushed the Northerners back, causing other Federal units to withdraw and giving the Confederates a victory at Pickett's Mill. Their win went for naught, though, as Sherman simply moved around the Southerners, heading for Marietta. Here he dislodged Johnston once again, as the two-to-one advantage in Federal numbers and their greater firepower proved too much for Johnston to resist.

### Kennesaw Mountain

By late June 1864, Sherman and Johnston were dancing a strange ballet of attack and maneuver, but the Federal commander abruptly decided to try something new. In later years Sherman indicated that his officers and opponents had become used to his propensity for flanking movements; he wanted to shake things up, he said, and demonstrate that he was capable of different tactics if a favorable opportunity arose. With rain and mud rendering movement difficult, Sherman decided to assault Johnston head-on at Kennesaw Mountain, a 1,808-foot ridge that dominated the surrounding countryside—including the railroad on which he depended for supplies. Johnston had constructed miles of trenches and fortifications on Kennesaw and nearby hills; Cleburne's Division was ordered to take a position in the center of the Confederate line.

As it turned out, the main Federal attack came in Cleburne's direction. The 33rd Alabama, with the rest of Lowrey's brigade, was deployed to the right side of Cheatham Hill, facing two Federal divisions led by Jefferson C. Davis and John Newton—around 8,000 men in all. Newton attacked the sector held by the 33rd, which lay across a shallow creek situated in a valley about twenty feet deep that gave way to sloping ground, all of which was densely forested and covered with thick underbrush that made a proper pre-attack reconnaissance impossible. Felled trees and sharpened stakes driven into the ground complicated the Federal attack, which kicked off with an artillery barrage around 8:00 am on June 27. Though the Northerners managed to make some progress at first, ferocious fire from the 33rd and the rest of their compatriots drove the Federals back. Having lost 3,000 casualties to the Southerners' 1,000, Sherman finally called off the assault and left the field to his foes; a few days later he flanked Johnston once more, causing the Confederates to withdraw yet again and leading to Johnston's dismissal by Jefferson Davis on July 17.

The new commander of the Army of Tennessee was John Bell Hood, a hard-charging general who had spent part of the war serving under Longstreet in Lee's Army of Northern Virginia. Although he had demonstrated great personal bravery numerous times on the battlefield and was regarded as one of the best brigade and division commanders in the entire Confederate Army, Hood's former boss seems to have questioned his fitness for this level of command. "Hood is a gallant fighter," Robert E. Lee is reported to have said upon hearing of his former subordinate's promotion; "but I am doubtful as to the other qualities necessary." Private Matthews, upon hearing that Hood had taken command, says that he "... was known to us as a hard fighter ... all agreed that we had hard work in front of us."


## Atlanta

### A death in the family

After taking command of the Army of Tennessee, General Hood immediately attacked Sherman in a series of spectacular but ill-advised assaults that ultimately sealed his fate at Atlanta. The first of these came at Peachtree Creek, where the 33rd Alabama was held in reserve and played no role in the contest. Hood's men were initially successful, but miscommunication and fierce Federal counterattacks finally turned the tide in Sherman's favor, and the Army of Tennessee was forced back into their fortifications around the city.

One day after Peachtree Creek the 33rd Alabama lost its regimental commander, Colonel Samuel Adams, who had been with it from its inception. Walking along the front line early that morning inspecting his men, Adams was shot by a Federal sharpshooter; he sat down by a small oak tree with both hands over his heart, and died there. Lieutenant Colonel Robert Crittenden took command of the regiment that same day.

### Battle of Atlanta

Despising Sherman's overwhelming numbers and determined to renew his offensive, General Hood decided to attack James B. McPherson's Army of the Tennessee (not to be confused with Hood's own Army of Tennessee). Withdrawing from his outer line of defenses into his interior fortifications, Hood successfully enticed the Federals to move forward, then sent his cavalry to raid Sherman's exposed supply lines while ordering General Hardee's corps—including Cleyburne's Division and the 33rd Alabama—to hit the Union left flank. The 33rd engaged around noon on July 22, charging into a wooded area and capturing "prisoners, guns and accouterments, knapsacks and blankets, files and an ambulance." The regiment stopped at a nearby creek to fill their canteens, which gave the Federal defenders time to bring up artillery and reinforcements; these blasted the 33rd as they emerged from the creek valley and charged through a field and up a hill toward their lines.

Private Matthews describes the action in these words:

> We charged up a hill in a field to within some thirty yards of a line in a ditch that we could not carry, but lay down and while lying there firing one man of the regiment wandered about us with a Minie ball in his head, and a knot of brains as large as a hen egg over the hole; and occasionally we heard another ball strike him, which he did not appear to mind, and we not caring, thinking the sooner he died the better. Then we had orders to get out a few at a time; soon after I saw a line of Federals through the bushes in the branch [creek] ... shouting and calling us to halt, and capturing part of the regiment ... I was not obeying Yankees when I had good legs, and by bearing obliquely up the branch, then into the woods where I dropped behind a pole, then a shell struck one end of it knocking over one man, when I got up and further to the rear. Now we reformed the regiment near where we had captured the line of Federal temporary works earlier in the fight, and with our bayonets soon had quite a ditch to get into ...

When one Lieutenant in the regiment realized that the captured Federal ambulance contained a 10-gallon keg of whiskey, he immediately sent soldiers back to guard it until it could be safely removed. Once the 33rd had finished fortifying its position, the whiskey was doled out at the rate of one gill per man, measured in a tin cup.

### Digging in

During the Siege of Atlanta, members of the 33rd quickly learned that they were safer below ground than above it. At first they slept on the ground just behind their trenches, but with snipers and artillery wreaking havoc among them at night, they decided to stay in their ditch at all times. Perpendicular trenches were dug to grant access to their rear areas, while lights of any kind were banned at night. With no means of washing their clothes, the men suffered from insect infestations; their agony was compounded by a nearby Federal gun that managed to draw a transverse bead on their trench, doing considerable damage until Confederate counter-battery fire finally silenced it. The regiment was gradually moved to the left each day, digging new ditches in the red clay soil with bayonets, spades or picks, but never engaging the enemy.

### Jonesborough

On the night of August 30, the 33rd Alabama was ordered to move to its left, with its troops collapsing from exhaustion every time the regiment stopped to rest. Arriving in the Atlanta suburb of Jonesborough on the morning of the 31st, the 33rd was fed into the line and permitted to rest for a time. In the afternoon they and the rest of Lowery's Brigade were ordered to charge the Federal works, where they managed to capture two steel cannon. They were quickly ambushed by dismounted Union cavalry commanded by Hugh Judson Kilpatrick and armed with Spencer Repeating Rifles; the brigade managed to drive them back, but were soon stopped by other Federal troops and returned to their lines.

On September 1, Cleburne's division was attacked by elements of two Federal corps. Private Matthews reports that the Federals nearly broke their line, only to be driven back with the help of reinforcements from General Cheatham's division. These men were later withdrawn to bolster up another section of the line, however, leaving the 33rd to defend its sector with a single line of troops and no reserve. Further Federal attacks did not materialize; the Northerners were content to snipe at the 33rd throughout the rest of the day while their compatriots smashed through the Confederate line further north, leading the remnants to withdraw around nine that evening. Members of the regiment could see fires and hear explosions on the horizon, as Hood destroyed all of his supplies in Atlanta and evacuated the city. The Alabamians linked up with an ambulance carrying their wounded and followed it to Lovejoy, Georgia, where they repulsed a Federal attack on the railroad there and got the first real night's sleep they had enjoyed in 122 days.


## Back to Tennessee

### Moving on

After his defeat at Atlanta, General Hood regrouped his army at Lovejoy's Station, following which he moved to Palmetto, Georgia. Here the Army of Tennessee was reviewed by Confederate President Jefferson Davis, who had come to speak with Hood about his next move. Even after the debacle at Atlanta, Hood still retained a formidable force of 39,000 men, and though Davis expressed disappointment in the way he had fought in Georgia and spoke of relieving him from command, he ultimately decided that Hood would keep his job. Davis did order Lieutenant General Hardee, the 33rd's longtime corps commander, to a new assignment, replacing him with Frank Cheatham. Hoping to draw Sherman away from Atlanta, Hood and Davis decided that the Army of Tennessee would move north toward Chattanooga, seeking to damage Federal supply lines and force Sherman to do battle on terrain favorable to the Confederates.

By October 3, 1864, the Army of Tennessee had reached Kennesaw, site of their battle earlier that summer. So far, Hood's plan seemed to be working: Sherman had sent General Thomas back to Nashville to organize troops in that state, while sending another division under Brigadier General James Morgan to Chattanooga. Federal cavalry assigned to follow Hood's army lost track of him periodically and were only able to give an approximate picture of his movements. The 33rd camped near Lost Mountain on the third, on an old battlefield where the Confederate dead had been buried in shallow graves or simply left to rot. Private Matthews reported seeing decaying hands, feet or limbs protruding from the dirt, where dogs and other scavengers had dug up the graves to get at the rotting food in their haversacks. After spending a day reburying the exposed corpses, the 33rd moved on to Dallas and then to Cedartown, where one man in the regiment was killed in a freak accident after lightning struck a stack of rifles he was hanging his haversack on. Turning northeast toward Dalton, the regiment tore up railroad tracks along Sherman's supply line by heating the rails atop a fire made of railroad ties, then bending them. Men from the regiment were beginning to recognize old battlefields and campsites; on one night near Lafayette, the regiment even camped in the exact spot it had occupied just before the Battle of Chickamauga, the year before. With rations severely limited in the picked-over countryside, sorghum became even more popular than ever: soldiers would leave the marching column to gather armfuls of sugar cane for themselves and their friends or steal it from nearby farms at night; while their officers did not publicly sanction this behavior, they were known to eat their share after their troops had bivouacked for the evening.

### Home, sweet home

Bypassing a strong Federal garrison at Resaca, Hood turned southwest and headed into Alabama, toward George Thomas' army headquartered in Nashville, Tennessee. For the first time in the war the 33rd would be operating inside its native state, if only briefly. Sherman had turned back toward Atlanta, from whence he would begin his famed March to the Sea, after sending additional troops to help Thomas in Tennessee. Hood's plan was to drive north into Tennessee, defeat Thomas there, then move into Kentucky and thence east into Virginia, where Robert E. Lee was under siege at Petersburg. Seeking to link up with reinforcements under famed cavalry General Nathan Bedford Forrest, Hood moved west through northern Alabama to Florence, then north into Tennessee.

### Spring Hill

At first, Generals Thomas and Sherman did not believe that Hood would actually invade Tennessee, with a Federal army about to burn its way through Georgia. However, as it became clear that this was Hood's destination, Thomas began to take action. Ordering Major General John M. Schofield to move to Columbia on the Duck River, Thomas hoped to intercept Hood before he could seize this important crossing. Hood split his army into three columns: the 33rd and the rest of Cheatham's Corps marched in the westernmost one through seventy miles of freezing rain, sleet and bitterly cold winds toward Mt. Pleasant, where the three columns reunited and continued in the direction of Columbia. Effectively screened by Forrest's cavalry, the Confederates reached Columbia just after the Federals had arrived and started to entrench. Bold maneuvers on the part of General Forrest, combined with artillery fire and effective demonstrations by the rest of Hood's army allowed them to cross the Duck River east of town, moving north toward Spring Hill—for once, the Army of Tennessee had been able to use the same tactic Sherman had used so well against them in Georgia. Amazingly, neither side reported any casualties in this encounter, which had consisted almost entirely of feints and shelling.

Having moved around Schofield's rapidly retreating force, Hood hoped to catch and destroy it near Spring Hill, to the north of Columbia. The Army of Tennessee moved rapidly along back-country roads and through fields and woods, with the men required to keep in ranks at all times while stragglers were dealt with severely. Forrest's cavalry arrived at the crossroads around 11:30 am on November 29; there they ran into elements of the Federal IV Corps, which had rushed ahead to hold the crossing until the rest of Schofield's army could arrive. Cleburne's division arrived in the afternoon just as Forrest's men were about to exhaust their ammunition. They immediately deployed for an attack, with the 33rd Alabama crossing a small stream and advancing around 4:00 pm with the rest of their division toward a Federal brigade under the command of Colonel Luther Prentice Bradley. Cleburne staggered his brigades in echelon formation, with Lowrey's Brigade on the far right. Lowrey's men engaged first, with the 33rd advancing "across a slope and across a field, [driving] the Federals from behind some rail defenses, then on up and around ... a horse lot rail fence, barn and dwelling where we were making a stand ... we followed them down a slope, where we halted and reformed the line." With Cleburne personally leading Govan's Arkansas Brigade in support, his division soon routed the Federals and advanced toward Schofield's line of march on the Columbia Pike. Here they were stopped cold by Federal artillery; as darkness fell, the entire Confederate attack ground to a halt. Although Hood planned to attack Schofield's approaching army in the morning, the Federals slipped by him in the darkness while he and his men slept, moving on to the nearby town of Franklin. Here the 33rd and the rest of Hood's army were about to experience their worst day of the war.

### Franklin

On November 30, 1864, General Hood awoke to learn that Schofield's army had slipped by him during the night and was now safely entrenched in Franklin, 12 miles (19 km) to the north. Enraged at this unexpected development, Hood angrily blamed his subordinates—especially Cheatham—for letting the Federals escape. Determined to stop Schofield from uniting with Thomas' main force at Nashville, Hood resolved to attack him head-on at Franklin, even though the Federals were now behind formidable fortifications (built for a previous battle fought there the year before). These included breastworks six-to-eight feet high fronted by four-foot wide ditches, and thorny obstructions using branches from Osage Orange trees in the area. Although Hood had roughly 39,000 men, only 27,000 would make the attack; this placed them at even odds with the Federals, who had the same number of men.

Hood's army began to arrive at Franklin around 1:00 pm, with the infantry far outpacing their artillery and other support personnel. Rather than wait for his guns to come up, Hood ordered an immediate assault, as the sun would be setting in just over three and a half hours and he did not want Schofield to get away again. Cleburne, Cheatham and Forrest all protested Hood's plan, but their commander remained determined. So, bereft of artillery support, Cleburne now prepared to lead his division across two miles of open field toward the very center of the Federal line. When General Govan said that few of them would live to see the end of this day, a visibly depressed Cleburne replied: "Well Govan, if we are to die, let us die like men."

During the attack at Franklin, Lowrey's Brigade formed a second line in Cleburne's division, behind the brigades of Govan and Granbury. Moving through savage cannon fire toward the Carter House Cotton Gin across the field, the 33rd halted briefly with their sister regiments to fix bayonets, having been ordered not to shoot until they reached the Federal trenches. Then screaming their famous "rebel yell" they charged headlong into the breastworks, held in this sector by the 100th and 104th Ohio Infantryi regiments, the 6th Ohio Battery and Battery A of the 1st Kentucky. Behind them stood the 16th Kentucky, the 12th Kentucky, the 8th Tennessee (Union) Infantry, and Battery "A" of the 1st Ohio Battery. Behind *them* was the 175th Ohio Infantry.

Two privates of the 33rd left accounts of what happened next. Private Matthews records:

> The ground was open, shells exploding within about one thousand yards of their works, and after they had opened [up] on us with small arms, the command 'double quick' was given. Then we went on a run and a continuous yell to their works ... I was wounded in getting through the abatis; by the time we got to their works our ranks were so thinned that our men could not get over. Many were shot in the attempt ...

Private Andrew Jackson Batchelor, of Company K, gives this account:

> Our first line captured the first line of the Federal works, a 'temporary' ... In our front, I think they [the first and second lines of the Federal defensive works] were about one hundred yards apart. Our orders were not to stop at the first work, but to cross over the second line. A few of us obeyed orders. How many poor fellows never reached the second line ... I could not see their works until within a few yards of them, the smoke was so dense. When I reached the ditch, it was filled with dead and wounded Confederates. I walked over on dead men. There were five or six of us near our colors, but all fell in the ditch but myself. Our colors were just over the works. I ran up on the works at the corner of the old gin house. I threw my gun down on the works at the corner of the gin house. Just then I was jerked over the works.

Savage fighting ensued as Cleburne's Confederates briefly penetrated the inner Federal defenses near the cotton gin; Federal soldiers wrote of desperately trying to stop the onrushing tide not just with rifles, but with axes, hatchets, and "anything that came into hand." Cleburne was killed fifty yards from the breastworks, after having two horses shot out from under him and running the rest of the way on foot, sword in one hand and his kepi hat in the other.

In his autobiography, written two years after the war, General Lowrey recalled his brigade's performance at Franklin:

> In the engagement at Franklin, my brigade was in the second line (on the east side of the Columbia Pike, behind Govan's and Granbury's brigades, the brigade's left extending to the pike). The enemy was driven from his first line, but checked our forces at his second line. I brought up my brigade (probably about 4:30 or 4:45 PM), and under the most destructive fire I ever witnessed, I threw my brigade into the outside ditch of his massive works, and my men fought the enemy across the parapet. Up to this time about half my men had fallen, and the balance could not scale the works. It would have been certain death or capture to every one of them. I went on my horse to within 30 feet of the works, where I had my horse wounded, and when I saw nothing else could be done I went to the rear, and began the work of gathering up the fragments of (Cleburne's) division.

The final charge of Patrick Cleburne and his men at Franklin has been featured in Civil War art. Some examples of this include portraits by Dale Gallon, Don Troiani and Mort Kunstler. Of his one-time subordinate,j the Irish doctor's son who had risen from a British corporal to a Southern Major General and then to immortality, General Hardee observed: "Where this division defended, no odds broke its line; where it attacked, no numbers resisted its onslaught, save only once; and there is the grave of Cleburne."

By the time the smoke cleared at Franklin, the Army of Tennessee had suffered a cataclysmic defeat: it had lost 6,252 men in just a couple of hours, including six dead generals, six wounded, and one captured. In addition, 55 of Hood's regimental commanders became casualties—an appalling loss of mid-level commanders in an army that had lost many, already. The 33rd Alabama lost two-thirds of its original 285 men; the remnant could no longer function as an independent fighting unit, so they were consolidated with survivors from the 16th and 45th Alabama regiments in a single formation, though the regimental designations were not rescinded.

### Nashville

Incredibly, even after his debacle at Franklin, General Hood insisted on continuing his march toward Nashville. He seems to have been motivated more by a desire to prevent his army from disintegrating through desertion than by any thought that he stood a chance of victory, now that Thomas had 71,842 men to his 23,053. Federal engineers had been fortifying the city for over two years; in addition to seven miles of trench lines and fortifications, a powerful fleet of Union ironclads on the Cumberland River offered additional firepower while protecting the city from amphibious assault. Hood arrived at Nashville on December 2 and set to work constructing his own line of fortifications, hoping that Thomas would emerge from behind his own breastworks and attack him under unfavorable conditions. Cheatham's corps, including the badly depleted 33rd Alabama, manned the right section of Hood's line. Lowrey's Brigade held the extreme right flank, which ended at a deep railroad cut belonging to the Nashville and Chattanooga Railroad. A bitter ice storm began on December 8 and subzero temperatures persisted through December 12, further complicating the Southerners' misery.

Hood did not have to wait long for his nemesis to appear: once the weather abated, Thomas emerged from his fortifications on December 15, and hit Hood's army. The 33rd Alabama was engaged with the rest of Lowrey's Brigade by a brigade of United States Colored Troops and another one composed of men described by their own commander as "new conscripts, convalescents and bounty jumpers." Intended to divert Hood's attention from the main attack intended for his left flank, this assault was beaten back, though the Federals continued to fire at the Alabamians and their friends over the course of the day. The Federal attack smashed Hood's left, and he was compelled to retreat to a new and more compact line, some distance to the rear of his original line.

The following morning found the 33rd Alabama with the rest of Cheatham's Division on the Confederate left flank, near a road called the Granny White Pike. This section of the front was hit late in the day by a three-brigade attack led by Federal Brigadier General John McArthur, which smashed through the poorly placed defenses and rolled up Hood's line from west to east as additional Union forces joined the assault. Hood's army rapidly disintegrated, with its shattered remnants fleeing down the Granny White Pike and nearby roads to Columbia, not ultimately stopping until they reached Tupelo, Mississippi, 220 miles away.

Already decimated by its fruitless assault at Franklin, the once-proud Army of Tennessee was all but obliterated at Nashville. Having taken 39,000 men with him into Tennessee the month before, Hood came out with 18,742. His own career irreparably ruined, Hood resigned his position and would not receive another command for the duration of the war. Private Matthews reports that on the day after the battle, "we that could stand were given two or three pounds of flour and a pound or two of beef, and told to get South."


## The Carolina Campaign

### Picking up the pieces

Following the disaster at Nashville, the few remaining members of the 33rd Alabama withdrew with the rest of their shattered army, first to Columbia, then further south to Decatur, Alabama, and thence to Tupelo. Morale had sunk to an all-time low, with many of the survivors believing they had been "unfortunately handled." In January 1865 the regiment drew shoes and marched from Tupelo to West Point, Mississippi, where they boarded a train that took them first to Meridian and then to Demopolis, Alabama. Here they were forced to sleep in the mud along the tracks, because they could find no branches to make ridge-poles for their tents. On the way to Selma the following day, their train derailed in an eerie repeat of the episode in late 1862; several men from Companies B and G were sitting on top of the cars, and were injured when their boxcars left the tracks. The men dusted themselves off and resumed their journey, arriving in Selma the next day, where they boarded steamboats and proceeded to Montgomery.

### Carolina

Following a 10-day furlough in February 1865, the last remnant of the 33rd Alabama—many bereft of weapons or basic equipment—boarded trains to Augusta, Georgia, where they were brigaded and ordered to march to Rock Hill, South Carolina, where they boarded another train for Smithfield, North Carolina. Here their final assignment awaited them, in Joseph Johnston's newly formed Army of the South. The regiment participated at the three-day Battle of Bentonville on March 19–21, 1865, not arriving on the battlefield until the final day when the contest was already lost. On April 8 they, along with the 16th and 45th Alabama, were consolidated with the 17th Alabama; this remnant was surrendered to General Sherman with the rest of Johnston's army at Bennett Place near Durham eighteen days later. Sherman issued ten day's rations to his former enemies, then released them to return to their homes.

On his way back to Alabama, Private Matthews reported that Federal soldiers assigned to guard the trains took pleasure in shooting at livestock from the moving boxcars. On one occasion near Dawson, Georgia, one such Yankee saw a woman plowing with an ox about a quarter-mile from the train; he shot it dead, and Matthews recorded that "had we men aboard protested, they would have shot us."

The regimental survivors returned to their homes in southeastern Alabama, where some resumed their lives while others eventually relocated to different counties and states.
