---
title: "5.56×45mm NATO (part 1/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/5.56%C3%9745mm_NATO
domain: ammunition
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: ammunition
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 1/2
---

# 5.56×45mm NATO

The **5.56×45mm NATO** (official NATO nomenclature **5.56 NATO**, commonly pronounced "five-five-six") is a rimless bottlenecked centerfire intermediate cartridge family developed in the late 1970s in Belgium by FN Herstal. It consists of the SS109, L110, and SS111 cartridges. On 28 October 1980, under STANAG 4172, it was standardized as the second standard service rifle cartridge for NATO forces as well as many non-NATO countries. Though they are not identical, the 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge family was derived from the .223 Remington cartridge designed by Remington Arms in the early 1960s, which has a near-identical case. However, firing chamber dimensions differ slightly between rifles manufactured for the designated cartridges. The differences may cause unsafe chamber pressures when firing 5.56 NATO in rifles designed for .223 Remington. Therefore, this combination is not recommended.


## History

In 1954, the larger 7.62×51mm NATO rifle cartridge was selected as the first standard NATO rifle cartridge. At the time of selection, there had been criticism that the recoil power of the 7.62×51mm NATO, when fired from a handheld lightweight modern service rifle in full automatic mode, did not allow for sufficient control, so the automatic follow-on shots would not hit the intended target but scatter around it.

The British had extensive evidence from their own experimentation with intermediate cartridges since 1945, and were on the point of adopting the .280 (7 mm × 43mm) cartridge when the selection of 7.62×51mm (.308) as the NATO standard was made. The FN company had also been involved in the development of the .280 round, including developing a version of the FN FAL in .280. The United States overruled concerns about the recoil and overall effectiveness of 7.62 mm, and the other NATO nations accepted that standardization was more important than the selection of a cartridge that was otherwise ideal.

The development of the cartridge that eventually became the .223 Remington (from which 5.56mm NATO would eventually be developed) would be intrinsically linked to the development of a new lightweight combat rifle. The cartridge and rifle were developed as a single unit by Fairchild Industries, Remington Arms, and several engineers working toward a goal set by the U.S. Continental Army Command (CONARC). Early development work began in 1957. A project to create a small-calibre, high-velocity (SCHV) firearm was created. Eugene Stoner of ArmaLite was invited to scale down the AR-10 (7.62mm) design. Winchester was also invited to participate. The parameters that were requested by CONARC:

- .22 caliber
- Bullet exceeding Mach 1 at 500 yards (457 metres)
- Rifle weight of 6 pounds (2.72 kilograms)
- Magazine capacity of 20 rounds
- Select fire for both semi-automatic and fully automatic use
- Penetration of US steel helmet through one side at 500 yd (457 m)
- Penetration of 0.135 inches (3.43 millimetres) steel plate at 500 yd (457 m)
- Accuracy and ballistics equal to M2 ball ammunition (.30-06 Springfield) out to 500 yd (457 m)
- Wounding ability equal to M1 carbine

Springfield Armory's Earle Harvey lengthened the .222 Remington cartridge case to meet the requirements. It was then known as the .224 Springfield. Concurrently with the SCHV project, Springfield Armory was developing a 7.62mm rifle. Harvey was ordered to cease all work on the SCHV to avoid any competition for resources.

Eugene Stoner of Armalite (a division of Fairchild Industries) had been advised to produce a scaled-down version of the 7.62mm AR-10 design. In May 1957, Stoner gave a live-fire demonstration of the prototype of the AR-15 for General Willard G. Wyman, Commander-in-Chief of CONARC. As a result, CONARC ordered rifles to test. Stoner and Sierra Bullet's Frank Snow began work on the .222 Remington cartridge. Using a ballistic calculator, they determined that a 55-grain bullet would have to be fired at 3,300 ft/s (1,006 m/s) to achieve the 500-yard performance necessary.

Robert Hutton (technical editor of *Guns & Ammo* magazine) started development of a powder load to reach the 3,300 ft/s (1,006 m/s) goal. He used DuPont IMR4198, IMR3031, and an Olin powder to work up loads. Testing was done with a Remington 722 rifle with a 22-inch Apex barrel. During a public demonstration, the round successfully penetrated the U.S. steel helmet as required. But testing showed that chamber pressures were excessively high.

Stoner contacted both Winchester and Remington about increasing the case capacity. Remington created a larger cartridge called the ".222 Special", which was loaded with DuPont IMR4475 powder. During parallel testing of the T44E4 (future M14) and the AR-15 in 1958, the T44E4 experienced 16 failures per 1,000 rounds fired compared to 6.1 for the AR-15.

Due to several different .222-caliber cartridges being developed for the SCHV project, the .222 Special was renamed .223 Remington in 1959. In May of that year, a report found that five- to seven-man squads armed with AR-15 rifles had higher hit probabilities than 11-man squads armed with M-14 rifles. At a 4th of July picnic, Air Force General Curtis LeMay fired an AR-15 and was very impressed with it. He ordered a number of them to replace M2 carbines that were in use by the Air Force. By November, testing at Aberdeen Proving Ground showed that the AR-15 failure rate had declined to 2.5 failures per 1,000 rounds, resulting in the M-16 being approved for Air Force Trials.

Marksmanship testing in 1961, comparing the M-16 to the M-14, indicated that 43% of M-16 shooters achieved "expert," while only 22% of M-14 shooters did. General LeMay subsequently ordered 80,000 rifles.

In the spring of 1962, Remington submitted the specifications of the .223 Remington to the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers' Institute (SAAMI). In July 1962, operational testing ended with a recommendation for adoption of the M-16 rifle chambered in .223 Remington.

In September 1963, the .223 Remington cartridge was officially accepted and named "Cartridge, 5.56mm ball, M193". The specification includes a Remington-designed bullet and the use of IMR4475 powder which resulted in a muzzle velocity of 3,250 ft/s (991 m/s) and a chamber pressure of 52,000 psi.

In 1970, NATO members signed an agreement to select a second, smaller caliber cartridge to replace the 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge. Of the cartridges tendered, the .223 Remington (M193) was the basis for a new design created by FN Herstal. The FN-created cartridge was named "5.56×45mm NATO" with a military designation of *SS109* in NATO and *M855* in the U.S. These new SS109 ball cartridges required a 228 mm (1-in-9 inch) twist rate while adequately stabilizing the longer L110 tracer projectile required an even faster, 178 mm (1-in-7 inch), twist rate.

The Belgian 62 gr SS109 round was chosen for standardization as the second NATO standard rifle cartridge which led to the October 1980 STANAG 4172. The SS109 used a 62 gr full metal jacket bullet with a seven grain mild steel tip to move the center of gravity rearward, increasing flight stability and thereby the chances of striking the target tip-first at longer ranges, in part to meet a requirement that the bullet be able to penetrate through one side of a WWII U.S. M1 helmet at 500 yd (457 m) (which was also the requirement for the 7.62×51mm NATO). An actual helmet was not used for developmental testing; instead, an SAE 1010 or SAE 1020 mild steel plate was positioned to be struck at exactly 90 degrees. It had a slightly lower muzzle velocity but better long-range performance due to higher sectional density and a superior drag coefficient.

The .223 Remington cartridge inspired an international tendency toward relatively small-sized, lightweight, high-velocity military service cartridges that allow a soldier to carry more ammunition for the same weight compared to their larger and heavier predecessor cartridges, have favourable maximum point-blank range or "battle zero" characteristics, and produce relatively low bolt thrust and free recoil impulse, favouring lightweight arms design and automatic fire accuracy.


## Cartridge dimensions

The 5.56×45mm NATO has a 1.85 mL (28.5 gr H2O) cartridge case capacity.

**5.56×45mm NATO maximum NATO cartridge dimensions**, all sizes in millimeters (mm)

The rifling twist rate for this cartridge is 177.8 mm (1 in 7 in), 6 grooves right-hand twist, Ø lands = 5.56 millimetres (0.219 in), Ø grooves = 5.69 millimetres (0.224 in).

According to STANAG 4172 and the official NATO proofing guidelines, the 5.56×45mm NATO case can handle up to 420.0 MPa (60,916 psi) piezo service pressure. In NATO-regulated organizations, every rifle cartridge combination has to be proofed at 537.5 MPa (77,958 psi) to certify for service issue. STANAG 4172 defines the Belgian ball cartridge SS109 as the NATO reference cartridge and adds a considerable number of technical requirements like a minimum pressure of 88.0 MPa (12,763 psi) at the gas port 280 millimetres (11.0 in) down the 508 millimetres (20.0 in) long standard proof barrel and primer sensitivity that are not defined by civilian C.I.P. and SAAMI ammunition rulings and recommendations.

The NATO military alliance uses a NATO-specific recognized class of procedures to control the safety and quality of firearms ammunition called NATO EPVAT testing. The civilian organisations C.I.P. and SAAMI use less comprehensive test procedures than NATO. The *NATO Manual of Proof and Inspection AC/225 (LG/3-SG/1) D/8* stipulates each weapon and component considered vulnerable to the effects of a rapid change in pressure, for example barrels, breech blocks and bolts, will be tested by firing one dry round at a corrected minimum of 25% over pressure and one oiled round at a corrected minimum of 25% over pressure. Over pressure of 25% means 25% in excess of the service pressure resulting from the 5.56×45mm NATO up to 430.0 MPa (62,366 psi) (Pmax) piezo service pressure. The service pressure is defined as the mean pressure generated by the service cartridge at a temperature of 21 °C (70 °F). Such a high-pressure proof is conducted with both the weapon and ammunition conditioned to an ambient temperature of 21 °C (70 °F). Each weapon will be individually tested using an ammunition lot that meets a minimum corrected mean chamber pressure. The corrected proof pressure requirement (service pressure (Pmax) + 25%) for the 5.56×45mm NATO like the STANAG 4172 is 537.3 MPa (77,929 psi) (PE) piezo pressure. This pressure has to be recorded in a NATO-design EPVAT barrel with Kistler 6215 transducer, HPI GP6 Transducer or by equipment to C.I.P. requirements.

The US SAAMI lists maximum average pressure (MAP) for the .223 Remington cartridge as 55,000 psi (379.2 MPa) piezo pressure with deviation of up to 58,000 psi (399.9 MPa).


## Rifle barrel configurations

When 5.56×45mm NATO was adopted as standard in 1980, NATO chose a 178 mm (1:7) rifling twist rate for the 5.56×45mm NATO chambering to adequately stabilize the relatively long NATO L110/M856 5.56×45mm NATO tracer projectile. The US at that time converted all rifles in inventory by replacing the barrels and all new US military rifles since have been manufactured with this ratio.

In the US, builders of AR-type rifles can specify barrels with either .223 Remington, .223 Wylde, 223 Noveske, or 5.56×45mm NATO chambers in lengths from pistol (7.5") to long rifle (24"). These barrels are also available with rifling ranging from 356 mm (1-in-14") to 178 mm (1-in-7"). US makers are moving toward 5.56×45mm NATO and 178 mm (1-in-7"), which will ensure the least liability. Those chambered for .223 Remington may not have a fast enough rifling to stabilize the longer 5.56×45mm NATO bullets, which range up to 77 gr. Some hunting loads of .223 Remington go to 90 grains.


## Performance

The 5.56×45mm NATO SS109/M855 cartridge (NATO: SS109; U.S.: M855) with standard 62 gr. lead core bullets with steel penetrator will penetrate about 38 to 51 cm (15 to 20 in) into soft tissue in ideal circumstances. As with all spitzer shaped projectiles, it is prone to yaw in soft tissue. However, at impact velocities above roughly 762 m/s (2,500 ft/s), it may yaw and then fragment at the cannelure (the crimping groove around the cylinder of the bullet). These fragments can disperse through flesh and bone, inflicting additional internal injuries.

Fragmentation, if and when it occurs, imparts much greater damage to human tissue than bullet dimensions and velocities would suggest. This fragmentation effect is highly dependent on velocity and therefore on barrel length: short-barreled carbines generate lower muzzle velocity and therefore lose wounding effectiveness at much shorter ranges than longer-barreled rifles.

Proponents of the hydrostatic shock theory contend that the shockwave from a high-velocity bullet results in wounding effects beyond the tissue directly crushed and torn by the bullet and fragments. However, others argue that tissue damage from hydrostatic shock is a myth. Critics argue that sonic pressure waves do not cause tissue disruption and that temporary cavity formation is the actual cause of tissue disruption mistakenly attributed to sonic pressure waves.

SS109/M855 NATO ball can penetrate up to 3 mm (0.12 in) of steel at 600 meters. According to Nammo, a Finnish-Norwegian ammunition producer, the 5.56×45mm NATO M995 armour piercing cartridge can penetrate up to 12 mm (0.47 in) of RHA steel at 100 meters.

The US Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory measured a ballistic coefficient (G7 BC) of 0.151 and form factor (G7 *i*) of 1.172 for the SS109/M855 ball projectile.

The Swedish military has measured the bullet velocities of SS109/M855 military cartridges at 4 m (13.1 ft) from the muzzle fired from differing barrel lengths.

| Barrel length | SS109/M855 V4 bullet velocity | V4 velocity loss |
|---|---|---|
| 210 mm (8.3 in) | 723 m/s (2,372 ft/s) | 41 m/s (135 ft/s) |
| 240 mm (9.4 in) | 764 m/s (2,507 ft/s) | 32 m/s (105 ft/s) |
| 270 mm (10.6 in) | 796 m/s (2,612 ft/s) | 29 m/s (95 ft/s) |
| 300 mm (11.8 in) | 825 m/s (2,707 ft/s) | 18 m/s (59 ft/s) |
| 330 mm (13.0 in) | 843 m/s (2,766 ft/s) | 23 m/s (75 ft/s) |
| 360 mm (14.2 in) | 866 m/s (2,841 ft/s) | 12 m/s (39 ft/s) |
| 390 mm (15.4 in) | 878 m/s (2,881 ft/s) | 14 m/s (46 ft/s) |
| 420 mm (16.5 in) | 892 m/s (2,927 ft/s) | 14 m/s (46 ft/s) |
| 450 mm (17.7 in) | 906 m/s (2,972 ft/s) | 9 m/s (30 ft/s) |
| 480 mm (18.9 in) | 915 m/s (3,002 ft/s) | 7 m/s (23 ft/s) |
| 508 mm (20.0 in) | 922 m/s (3,025 ft/s) | - |

### Criticism

There has been much debate about the bullet's allegedly poor on-target performance regarding stopping power, lethality, and range. Some of this criticism has been used to advocate an intermediate-sized cartridge between the 5.56 and 7.62 NATO sizes while criticisms of poor barrier penetration and accuracy have been used to support the M855A1 EPR round. Arguably, the criticisms about range, accuracy, and lethality are related to the change in barrel length and twist between the M16 and M4. The earlier 5.56 rounds (the original M193) were optimized for a 20-inch (51 cm) barrel with a 1:12 twist. In 1980, STANAG 4172 defined the 5.56×45mm NATO chambering and its accompanying 1:7 twist rifling. The shorter 14.5-inch (37 cm) barrel of the M4 carbine (with a STANAG 4172 conform 1:7 twist and M855/SS109 5.56 rounds^) generates significantly lower muzzle velocity, reducing the likelihood that the bullet will upset (yaw, fragment, or expand) in the target and resulting in less significant wounds.

> Combat operations the past few months have again highlighted terminal performance deficiencies with 5.56x45mm 62 gr. M855 FMJ. These problems have primarily been manifested as inadequate incapacitation of enemy forces despite their being hit multiple times by M855 bullets. These failures appear to be associated with the bullets exiting the body of the enemy soldier without yawing or fragmenting. This failure to yaw and fragment can be caused by reduced impact velocities, such as when fired from short-barreled weapons or at longer ranges. It can also occur when the bullets pass through only minimal tissue, such as a limb or the chest of a thin, malnourished individual, as the bullet may exit the body before it has a chance to yaw and fragment. In addition, bullets of the SS109/M855 type are manufactured by many countries in numerous production plants. However, all SS109/M855 types must be 62 gr. FMJ bullets with a steel penetrator in the nose have composition, jacket thickness, and relative weights of the jackets, penetrators, and cores that vary widely, as do the types and positions of the cannelures. Because of the significant differences in construction among bullets in the SS109/M855 category, terminal performance is quite variable, with differences observed in yaw, fragmentation, and penetration depths.

Wound profiles in ballistic gelatin

Note: images are not to same scale

M16 M193 5.56×45mm

M16A2 SS109/M855 5.56×45mm NATO

> If 5.56 mm bullets fail to upset (yaw, fragment, or deform) within tissue, the results are less significant wounds that may not cause adequate blood loss or damage to stop the target's attack or advances immediately. This is true for some 5.56×45mm FMJ bullets at extended ranges. As expected, with decreased wounding effects, rapid incapacitation is unlikely: enemy soldiers may continue to pose a threat to friendly forces, and violent suspects can remain a danger to law enforcement personnel and the public. Two other yaw issues: Angle-of-Attack (AOA) variations between different projectiles, even within the same lot of ammo, as well as Fleet Yaw variations between different rifles, were elucidated in 2006 by the Joint Service Wound Ballistic Integrated Product Team (JSWB-IPT), which included experts from the military law enforcement user community, trauma surgeons, aero ballisticians, weapon and munitions engineers, and other scientific specialists. These yaw issues were most noticeable at close ranges. They were more prevalent with certain calibers and bullet styles—the most susceptible being 5.56×45mm NATO FMJ ammunition like SS109/M855 and M193.

— Martin Fackler

The 5.56×45mm NATO standard SS109/M855 cartridge was designed for maximum performance when fired from a 508 mm (20.0 in) long barrel, as was the original 5.56 mm M193 cartridge. Experiments with longer length barrels up to 610 mm (24.0 in) resulted in no improvement or a decrease in muzzle velocities for the SS109/M855 cartridge. Shorter barrels produce a greater flash and noise signature, and adding a suppressor to a short-barreled AR family rifle can make it unreliable, as the reduced time for the propellant to burn in the barrel and the higher muzzle pressure at the suppressor entrance can cause faster cycling and feeding issues. Unless the gas port can be regulated or adjusted to higher pressures, suppressors for short-barreled 5.56×45mm NATO firearms must be larger and heavier than models for standard-length rifles to function reliably. SS109/M855 cartridges fired from barrels under about 254 mm (10.0 in) in length do not have enough muzzle velocity energy to cause extreme damage that occurs only at terminal velocities of over 750 m/s (2,500 ft/s) on impact, reducing the wounding capacity.

Compared to larger calibers, proponents of the 5.56×45mm NATO round contend that animal studies of the wounding effects of the 5.56×45mm NATO round versus the 7.62×39mm have found that the 5.56×45mm NATO round is more damaging, due to the post-impact behavior of the 5.56 mm projectile resulting in greater cavitation of soft tissues. The US Army contended in 2003 that the lack of close-range lethality of the 5.56×45mm NATO was more a matter of perception than fact. With controlled pairs and good shot placement to the head and chest, the target was usually defeated without issue. The majority of failures were due to hitting the target in non-vital areas, such as the extremities. However, a minority of failures occurred despite multiple chest hits.

Some have contended that shot placement is the most important factor in determining a bullet's lethality. Difficulty with the 5.56×45mm NATO at long ranges has been attributed to training; Swedish ISAF units relied on .50 BMG heavy machine guns for long-range shooting due to resilience to factors such as range and wind drift. Underperformance is thus attributed to errors in range and wind estimation, target lead, firing position, and stress under fire, all of which can be resolved through training.

### Improvements

Advances have been made in 5.56 mm ammunition. The U.S. military had adopted for limited issue a 77-grain (5.0 g) "Match" bullet, type classified as the Mk 262. The heavy, lightly constructed bullet fragments more violently at short range and also has a longer fragmentation range. Originally designed for use in the Mk 12 SPR, the ammunition has found favor with special forces units who were seeking a more effective cartridge to fire from their M4A1 carbines. Commercially available loadings with these heavier (and longer) bullets can be prohibitively expensive, costing much more than military surplus ammunition. Additionally, these heavy-for-caliber loadings sacrifice some penetrative ability compared to the M855 round (which has a steel penetrator tip). The performance of 5.56×45mm military ammunition can generally be categorized as almost entirely dependent on velocity to wound effectively. Heavy OTM bullets enhance soft tissue wounding ability at the expense of hard-target/barrier penetration.

U.S. Special Forces had sought to create a round that had increased power out of carbine M4 barrels and compact SCAR-L barrels, while increasing hard target performance. Developmental efforts led to the creation of the Mk318. The bullet uses an open-tip design to inflict damage on soft tissue and has a brass rear to penetrate hard targets. The tip and lead core fragments consistently, even when using short barrels, while the rear moves through once the front impacts. It has more consistent performance because it is not yaw-dependent like the M855; the nose fragments upon impact and solid rear penetrator continues to move relatively straight. This makes the Mk318 effective against personnel with or without body armor. The round also increases accuracy, from 3–5 minute of angle (MOA) with the M855 from an M4A1 barrel to 1.71 MOA at 300 yards and 1.67 MOA at 600 yards from a 14 in (360 mm) SCAR-L barrel.

For general issues, the U.S. Army adopted the M855A1 round in 2010 to replace the M855. The primary reason was pressure to use non-lead bullets. The lead slug is replaced by a copper alloy slug in a reverse-drawn jacket, with a hardened steel penetrator extending beyond the jacket, reducing lead contamination to the environment. The M855A1 offers several improvements other than being lead-free. It is slightly more accurate, has better consistency in its effect on wounding ability, and has increased penetrating capability. The 62-grain (4.0 g) projectile can better penetrate steel, brick, concrete, and masonry walls, as well as body armor and sheet metal. It penetrates 3⁄8 in (9.5 mm) of mild steel at 350 meters, which the M855 can only do at 160 meters. The propellant burns faster, which decreases the muzzle flash and gives a higher muzzle velocity, an important feature when fired from a short-barreled M4 carbine. Although the M855A1 is more expensive to produce, its performance is considered to make up for it. One possible danger is that it generates much greater pressure in the chamber upon firing, reducing the service life of parts and increasing the risk of catastrophic failure of the weapon (though this has yet to occur).

The U.S. Marines adopted the Mk318 in early 2010 due to delays with the M855A1. This was a temporary measure until the M855A1 was available to them, which occurred in mid-2010, when the Army began receiving the rounds. Both the Mk318 and M855A1 weigh the same, have similar performance, and outperform the M855 against all targets. SOCOM spent less money developing the Mk318, and it is marginally better than the M855A1 in some situations, but costs more per round. The Army spent more developing the M855A1, which performs as well or nearly as well as the Mk318 but is cheaper per round and is lead-free. While SOCOM constantly seeks better equipment, the Army and Marines have far more troops to supply and buy more ammunition than SOCOM does.

### Alternatives

If the 5.56 mm bullet is moving too slowly to reliably yaw, expand, or fragment on impact, the wound size and potential to incapacitate a person are greatly reduced. There have been numerous attempts to create an intermediate cartridge that addresses the complaints about 5.56 NATO's lack of stopping power, as well as the lack of controllability seen in rifles firing 7.62 NATO in full auto. Some alternative cartridges, such as the 300 AAC Blackout (7.62×35mm), prioritize penetration and stopping power at short ranges by sacrificing long-range performance. These calibers are designed to be interoperable with 5.56 by maintaining similar dimensions, allowing them to be used in a 5.56-chambered rifle with a simple barrel change.

By late 2004, the 6.8mm Remington SPC (6.8×43mm) was in limited use with U.S. Special Operators.However, it was not adopted for widespread use due to resistance from officials to changing calibers. In 2007, both the U.S. SOCOM and the U.S. Marine Corps decided not to field weapons chambered in 6.8×43mm due to logistical and cost issues.

In April 2022, the U.S. Army selected a new rifle and light machine gun as part of the Next Generation Squad Weapon Program. They will replace 5.56 mm weapons, being chambered in 6.8×51mm Fury that has greater accuracy and range while being more lethal than 5.56×45mm NATO and 7.62×51mm NATO against emerging threats.


## 5.56mm NATO versus .223 Remington

The exterior dimensions of the 5.56mm NATO and .223 Remington cartridges are identical. While the cartridges are identical other than powder load, the chamber leade, i.e., the area where the rifling begins, is cut to a sharper angle on some .223 commercial chambers. Because of this, a cartridge loaded to generate 5.56mm pressures in a 5.56mm chamber may develop pressures that exceed SAAMI limits when fired from a short-leade .223 Remington chamber. As the chambers differ, the head space gauges used for the two chamberings differ.

### Brass case

The dimensional specifications of 5.56 NATO and .223 commercial brass cases are identical. The cases tend to have similar case capacities when measured, with variations chiefly due to brand, not to the 5.56 vs .223 designation. The result is that there is no such thing as "5.56 brass" or ".223 brass"; the differences between the cartridges lie in pressure ratings and chamber length, not in the shape or thickness of the brass.

In July 2012, the US Army requested vendors to supply alternative cartridge cases to reduce the weight of an M855A1 5.56 mm round by at least 10 percent, as well as for the 7.62 NATO and .50 BMG rounds. The cartridge cases must meet all performance requirements when fully assembled, be usable by the Lake City Army Ammunition Plant, and be manufactured in quantities totaling approximately 45 million per year. Polymer-cased ammunition is expected as a likely lightweight case technology. A hybrid polymer/metal version of a conventional cartridge case would be thicker than regular cases and reduce the amount of space for the propellant, although certain polymers could be thermodynamically more efficient and not lose energy to the case or chamber when fired.

### Pressure

The pressure limits for .223 Rem and 5.56×45mm NATO are very similar, fired in their respectively designed chambers, if using similar measurement methodologies. Chamber pressures obtained using different methods are not comparable.

- The SAAMI sets the pressure limit for .223 Rem at 55,000 psi (379.21 MPa), using a chamber-conformal piston transducer. The US military uses a similar methodology (SCATP) and produced a very similar limit for their ammunition, at 380 MPa (55,114 psi), in the 1970s–80s. Early versions of NATO standards quote a very similar number.
  - On the other hand, Bryce Towsley quotes Jeff Hoffman from Black Hill Ammunition as saying that military cartridges can yield peak pressures in excess of 60,000 psi (413.69 MPa) in the SAAMI setup.
- The CIP sets the pressure limit for .223 Rem at 430 MPa (62,366 psi), using a drilled-case transducer.
- NATO EPVAT testing uses case-mouth transducer pressure.
  - The 2005 proof pressure for 5.56×45mm NATO is 537.5 MPa (77,958 psi), which, when divided by a factor of 1.25, yields the same maximum service pressure of 430 MPa (62,366 psi).
  - It is the current latest (2020) NATO AEP-97/AOP-4172 pressure testing method. NATO no longer gives a limit on the mean pressure, only a "mean + 3 standard deviations" limit of 445 MPa (64,542 psi). The "NATO Reference Ammunition" from the same publication has a mean pressure of 58,700 psi (404.72 MPa).

### Chamber

The 5.56mm NATO chamber, known as a NATO or mil-spec chamber, has a longer leade, the distance between the mouth of the cartridge and the point where the rifling engages the bullet. The .223 Remington chamber, known as the SAAMI chamber, is allowed to have a shorter leade and is only required to be proof tested to the lower SAAMI chamber pressure. To address these issues, various proprietary chambers exist, such as the Wylde chamber (Rock River Arms) or the ArmaLite chamber, which are designed to handle both 5.56×45mm NATO and .223 Remington equally well. The leade of the .223 Remington minimum C.I.P. chamber also differs from the 5.56mm NATO chamber specification. The casings and chambers for .223 Remington and 5.56×45mm NATO are virtually the same dimensions. Still, because .223 Remington is designed to handle much lower pressures than 5.56×45mm NATO, the rounds are not completely interchangeable. Firing a 5.56×45mm NATO round out of a rifle chambered in .223 Remington could be injurious or fatal to the user as well as the gun, however .223 Remington ammunition can be fired safely from almost any rifle chambered in 5.56×45mm NATO as the NATO specified rifles can handle much higher chamber pressures than the .223 Remington is capable of producing.

Using commercial .223 Remington cartridges in a 5.56mm NATO-chambered rifle should work reliably, but until recently it was believed that it was less accurate than when fired from a .223 Remington-chambered gun due to the longer leade. Although that may have been true in the early 1960s when the two rounds were developed, recent testing has shown that rifles chambered in 5.56×45mm NATO can also fire .223 ammunition every bit as accurately as rifles chambered in .223 Remington, and the 5.56×45mm NATO chamber has the additional advantage of being able to fire both calibers safely.

Using 5.56×45mm NATO mil-spec cartridges (such as M855) in a .223 Remington-chambered rifle can lead to excessive wear and stress on the rifle and may even be unsafe, and SAAMI recommends against the practice. (More recent tests have failed to find any "dangerous pressure spike" when firing military ammunition in a .223 chamber.) Some commercial rifles marked as ".223 Remington" are in fact suited for 5.56×45mm NATO, such as many commercial AR-15 variants and the Ruger Mini-14 (marked ".223 cal", except the Mini-14 "Target" model, which only fires .223), but the manufacturer should always be consulted to verify that this is acceptable before attempting it, and signs of excessive pressure (such as flattening or gas staining of the primers) should be looked for in the initial testing with 5.56×45mm NATO ammunition.

The upper receiver (to which the barrel with its chamber is attached) and the lower receiver are entirely separate parts in AR-15 style rifles. If the lower receiver has either .223 or 5.56 stamped on it, it does not guarantee the upper assembly is rated for the same caliber, because the upper and the lower receiver in the same rifle can, and frequently do, come from different manufacturers, particularly with rifles sold to civilians or second-hand rifles that have been repaired with spare parts. Since all parts are interchangeable, a shooter *must* take great caution to check for markings of 5.56×45mm on the barrel before attempting to fire 5.56×45mm NATO ammunition out of it.

In more practical terms, as of 2010 most AR-15 parts suppliers engineer their complete upper assemblies (not to be confused with stripped uppers where the barrel is not included) to support both calibers to satisfy market demand and prevent any potential problems. Some manufacturers have begun offering a hybrid .223 Wylde chamber designed to support both cartridges optimally.


## Ammunition capacity for weight comparison

The first confrontations between the 7.62×39mm chambered AK-47 and the 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge M14 rifle came in the early part of the Vietnam War. Battlefield reports indicated that the M14 was uncontrollable in full-auto and that soldiers could not carry enough ammo to maintain fire superiority over the AK-47. A replacement was needed; as a result, the Army was forced to reconsider a 1957 request by General Willard G. Wyman, commander of the U.S. Continental Army Command (CONARC) to develop a .223 caliber (5.56 mm) select-fire rifle weighing 6 lbs (2.7 kg) when loaded with a 20-round magazine.

This request ultimately led to the development of a scaled-down version of the Armalite AR-10, called the ArmaLite AR-15 rifle. During testing it was found that a 5- to 7-man team armed with ArmaLite AR-15s had the same firepower as an 11-man team armed with M14s. Also, soldiers armed with ArmaLite AR-15s could carry nearly three times more ammunition as those armed with M14s (649 rounds vs 220 rounds). The ArmaLite AR-15, officially designated *Rifle, caliber 5.56 mm, M16*, was later adopted by U.S. infantry forces as the standard-issue rifle.

The following table compares the maximum ammunition load a fire team can carry to support five similar rifles (measured in box magazines of 10 kg (22 lb)):

| Rifle | Cartridge | Cartridge weight | Weight of loaded magazine | Max. 10 kilogram ammo load |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| AK-47 (1949) | 7.62×39mm | 252 gr (16.3 g) | 30 rd mag at 819 g (1.806 lb) | 12 mags at 9.83 kg (21.7 lb) for 360 rds |
| M14 (1959) | 7.62×51mm NATO | 393 gr (25.5 g) | 20 rd mag at 750 g (1.65 lb) | 13 mags at 9.75 kg (21.5 lb) for 260 rds |
| M16 (1962) | .223 Remington | 183 gr (11.9 g) | 20 rd mag at 320 g (0.71 lb) | 31 mags at 9.92 kg (21.9 lb) for 620 rds |
| AK-74 (1974) | 5.45×39mm | 162 gr (10.5 g) | 30 rd mag at 545 g (1.202 lb) | 18 mags at 9.81 kg (21.6 lb) for 540 rds |
| M16A2 (1982) | 5.56×45mm NATO | 190 gr (12.3 g) | 30 rd mag at 490 g (1.08 lb) | 20 mags at 9.80 kg (21.6 lb) for 600 rds |


## 5.56mm NATO versus 7.62mm NATO

| Cartridge | Model | Cartridge size | Cartridge weight | Bullet weight | Velocity | Energy |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 5.56mm NATO | M855 5.56mm (5.56 × 45 mm) Ammunition | 5.56×45mm | 12.31 g (190 gr) | 4.02 g (62 gr) | 922 m/s (3,025 ft/s) | 1,709 J |
| 7.62mm NATO | M80 7.62mm (7.62×51mm) Ammunition | 7.62×51mm | 25.40 g (392 gr) | 9.33 g (144 gr) | 838 m/s (2,749 ft/s) | 3,275 J |

Hit probability refers to the ability of a soldier to concentrate on firing despite their weapon's recoil and noise, which is noticeably different between the two cartridges. The 7.62 NATO has twice the impact energy of the 5.56 NATO, preferable if a target is protected by higher-level armor, especially at "medium" range. If not, both rounds normally penetrate satisfactorily through enemies up to approximately 600 meters. A 5.56 NATO round fired from a 20 in (510 mm) barrel has a flatter trajectory than a 7.62 NATO round fired from a barrel of equal length, while the 5.56 NATO fired from a 14.5 in (370 mm) barrel has the same trajectory as the 7.62 NATO from a 20 in barrel, as well as the same time of flight. A 7.62 NATO round reaches 50 percent of its velocity within 80 mm (3.1 in) of the barrel when fired, so decreasing the barrel length for close quarters combat results in increased muzzle pressure and greater noise and muzzle flash.
