---
title: "1948 Arab–Israeli War (part 3/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1948_Arab%E2%80%93Israeli_War
domain: suez-canal
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: suez canal
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 3/4
---

# 1948 Arab–Israeli War

At the time of the truce, the British view was that "the Jews are too weak in armament to achieve spectacular success". As the truce commenced, a British officer stationed in Haifa stated that the four-week-long truce "would certainly be exploited by the Jews to continue military training and reorganization while the Arabs would waste [them] feuding over the future divisions of the spoils". During the truce, the Israelis sought to bolster their forces by massive import of arms. The IDF was able to continue importing large amounts of weapons from Czechoslovakia as well as those weapons purchased abroad elsewhere during the truce. The IDF was also able to improve training of forces and carry out reorganization during this time, including improvements to its command and control. Yitzhak Rabin, an IDF commander at the time of the war and later Israel's fifth Prime Minister, stated "[w]ithout the arms from Czechoslovakia... it is very doubtful whether we would have been able to conduct the war".

The Israeli army increased its manpower from approximately 30,000–35,000 men to almost 65,000 during the truce due to mobilization and the constant immigration into Israel. Most existing IDF brigades were expanded with two new brigades entering service. The import of massive quantities of weapons and munitions from Czechoslovakia continued, with about 25,000 rifles, 5,000 machine guns, and fifty million bullets from Czechoslovakia having reached Israel by the end of the truce. In addition, Israel received heavy weaponry that had been purchased in the United States and Western Europe during both the initial four weeks of fighting and the truce, with numerous artillery pieces and armored vehicles, mostly American-built half-tracks, some of which had mounted guns and mortars, arriving by the end of June, as well as a continued trickle of fighter aircraft from Czechoslovakia. After the truce ended, the IDF was able to resume fighting in a far stronger position. According to Benny Morris, "the army that confronted the Arab states on 8–9 July was radically different from, and far stronger than, that which they had met on 15 May."

As well as violating the arms and personnel embargo, the Israelis also sent fresh units to the front lines, much as their Arab enemies did. In addition to reinforcing their lines with fresh units, the Arabs violated the truce by continuing to block supplies from reaching Israeli settlements they had cut off and occasionally opening fire while the Israelis raided and occupied positions that would give them an advantage when combat resumed.

In addition to bolstering their military forces, the Israelis managed to rapidly turn all of the pre-state national institutions of the Yishuv into full-fledged state institutions during the initial four weeks of fighting and the truce period. They also used the truce to begin planning and establishing new settlements, mostly on territory they had recently conquered.

During the truce, in what became known as the Altalena Affair, the Irgun attempted to bring in a private arms shipment aboard a ship called *Altalena*. Fearing a coup by the Irgun, which was being integrated into the IDF Ben-Gurion ordered that the arms be confiscated by force. After some miscommunication, the army was ordered by Ben-Gurion to sink the ship. Sixteen Irgun members and three IDF soldiers were killed in the fighting.

#### UN mediator Bernadotte

The ceasefire was overseen by UN mediator Folke Bernadotte and a team of UN Observers made up of army officers from Belgium, United States, Sweden and France. Bernadotte was voted in by the General Assembly to "assure the safety of the holy places, to safeguard the well-being of the population, and to promote 'a peaceful adjustment of the future situation of Palestine'". Folke Bernadotte reported:

> During the period of the truce, three violations occurred ... of such a serious nature:
> 
> 1. the attempt by ...the Irgun Zvai Leumi to bring war materials and immigrants, including men of military age, into Palestine aboard the ship *Altalena* on 21 June...
> 2. Another truce violation occurred through the refusal of Egyptian forces to permit the passage of relief convoys to Jewish settlements in the Negeb...
> 3. The third violation of the truce arose as a result of the failure of the Transjordan and Iraqi forces to permit the flow of water to Jerusalem.

After the truce was in place, Bernadotte began to address the issue of achieving a political settlement. The main obstacles in his opinion were "the Arab world's continued rejection of the existence of a Jewish state, whatever its borders; Israel's new 'philosophy', based on its increasing military strength, of ignoring the partition boundaries and conquering what additional territory it could; and the emerging Palestinian Arab refugee problem".

Taking all the issues into account, Bernadotte presented a new partition plan. He proposed there be a Palestinian Arab state alongside Israel and that a "Union" "be established between the two sovereign states of Israel and Jordan (which now included the West Bank); that the Negev, or part of it, be included in the Arab state and that Western Galilee, or part of it, be included in Israel; that the whole of Jerusalem be part of the Arab state, with the Jewish areas enjoying municipal autonomy and that Lydda Airport and Haifa be 'free ports' – presumably free of Israeli or Arab sovereignty". Israel rejected the proposal, in particular the aspect of losing control of Jerusalem, but they did agree to extend the truce for another month. The Arabs rejected both the extension of the truce and the proposal.

### Second phase: 8–18 July 1948 ("Ten Day Battles")

On 8 July, the day before the expiration of the truce, Egyptian forces under General Muhammad Naguib renewed the war, launching an offensive in the hopes of catching the IDF off guard. Shortly afterward, the IDF launched simultaneous offensives on all fronts. This period was also marked by increased aerial activity by both sides, with Israel bombing numerous Arab cities and the Egyptians bombing Tel Aviv. The fighting continued for ten days until the UN Security Council declared the second truce on 18 July. During the fighting, the Israelis were able to open a lifeline to a number of besieged kibbutzim.

#### Southern front

The initial focus of fighting in the south was a strip of territory along the Majdal-Al-Faluja-Bayt Jibrin road which linked their major holdings, both of the main force up to Isdud and the secondary force up to Hebron and Bethlehem, and which cut off Israeli settlements in the Negev as well as Israeli forces protecting them. Israel planned an offensive to break the Egyptian hold on this strip. On 8 July, the Egyptians preempted with an offensive of their own to deepen their hold, which was partially successful. While some attacks were repulsed, the Egyptians managed to take an important crossroads southwest of Negba. In addition, the Israelis evacuated Kfar Darom due to its position being considered untenable.

Soon after, the IDF went on the offensive, launching Operation An-Far. The Israelis took and then withdrew from Iraq Suwaydan and Bayt 'Affa although they failed to take the Iraq Suwaydan police fort. They captured Ibdis and subsequently held off Egyptian counterattacks with air support, and also took Tell es-Safi. On 12 July, the Egyptians counterattacked with an assault on Negba, an important point in the Israeli lines. While launching two diversionary assaults at Julis and Ibdis, the Egyptians launched a series of attacks against Negba using three infantry battalions, an armored battalion, and an artillery regiment. The attacks were repulsed, with the Egyptians suffering an estimated 200-300 casualties while the Israelis lost 5 killed and 16 wounded.

The IDF continued its offensive in the following days, capturing a hill north of Negba and raiding Egyptian positions. On 16–18 July, the Israelis carried out Operation Death to the Invader to link the Israeli settlements in the Negev with core Israeli territory. The offensive succeeded in capturing numerous villages, although attacks on two villages were repulsed. However, the objective of achieving a link between the Israeli settlement concentration in the Negev and the rest of Israeli-held territory was not achieved. The IDF also managed to temporarily disrupt Egyptian traffic along the Majdal-Bayt Jibrin road with the capture of Karatiyya although the Egyptians swiftly built a bypass road. Meanwhile, the Egyptians launched a series of attacks of their own, which failed. On 14 July, an Egyptian attack on Gal On was repulsed. The Egyptians then assaulted the lightly defended village of Be'erot Yitzhak. The Egyptians managed to penetrate the village perimeter, but the defenders concentrated in an inner position in the village and fought off the Egyptian advance until IDF reinforcements arrived and drove out the attackers. The Egyptians suffered an estimated 200 casualties, while the Israelis had 17 dead and 15 wounded. The Egyptians did not attack any more Israeli villages following this battle. On 18 July, an Egyptian counterattack against Karatiyya was repulsed after an Egyptian tank was knocked out by an Israeli PIAT, causing the remaining tanks and infantry to retreat.

#### Operation Dani

The most important Israeli offensive launched during this period was Operation Dani, which was aimed at capturing the remaining Arab-held sections of the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem road and the hills to its north from Latrun to Ramallah. The plan of Operation Dani was to capture territory east of Tel Aviv and then to push inland and relieve the Jewish population and forces in Jerusalem. The cities of Lydda and Ramle were particularly crucial. Lydda had become an important military center in the region, lending support to Arab military activities elsewhere, and Ramle was one of the main obstacles blocking Jewish transportation. Each town was defended by token Arab Legion forces as well as local militias and Jordanian tribal irregulars. Lydda in particular had a local militia of around 1,000 residents and an Arab Legion contingent of 125–300. The Arab Legion's 4th Regiment, which had a substantial force of armored cars and artillery pieces, also joined the fighting on 10 July. The IDF committed what was up to then its strongest force ever to the operation, comprising three brigades, several additional battalions, and some 30 artillery pieces.

##### Lydda and Ramle

The IDF launched a pincer movement to surround the cities of Lydda and Ramle on 10 July. Two brigades, one of which was augmented by two additional battalions, took numerous villages in their path along with Lydda Airport. On the following day, the IDF advanced on Lydda from the north via Majdal al-Sadiq and al-Muzayri'a, and from the east via Khulda, al-Qubab, Jimzu and Daniyal. Israeli forces also used bombers for the first time in the conflict to bombard the city. Resistance was initially light, although the IDF failed to capture Dayr Tarif in a fierce battle with the Arab Legion, while the Legion in turn launched an attack against IDF troops in Jimzu which was repulsed. The IDF captured Lydda on 11 July after an initial attack on the city was repulsed, while Ramla was occupied without a fight the following day after its notables surrendered.

On 12 July, after the fighting had initially settled down, an Arab Legion armored car unit entered Lydda and a firefight with IDF troops ensued, during which some locals joined the fighting and shot at IDF troops. This was interpreted by the Israeli government as "rebellion" and Ben-Gurion authorized the expulsion of the civilian populations of Lydda and Ramla. The civilian populations of Lydda and Ramle, totalling some 50,000-70,000 people, were subsequently violently expelled. Hundreds of Palestinians were killed in multiple mass killing events in Lydda, and many were expelled without the provision of transport vehicles, as had been done in Ramle; many of the evictees died on the long walk under the hot July sun.

To the northeast, the IDF's Alexandroni Brigade took two Iraqi-held villages north of Qula. The Arab Legion's 1st Brigade counterattacked against Qula and days of fighting ensued, with the village repeatedly changing hands until the Alexandroni Brigade secured the village on 18 July right before the second truce came into effect. After the final assault on the village, the bodies of 16 Alexandroni Brigade prisoners previously captured there were found, most of them mutilated.

From 13 to 18 July, the Israelis launched a series of minor attacks before the second truce, making some additional gains. Crucially, they took a series of villages south of the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem road, opening a new road to Jerusalem.

##### Latrun

On 15–16 July, the Israelis launched an attack on Latrun but did not manage to occupy the fort. A desperate second attempt occurred on 18 July by units from the Yiftach Brigade equipped with armored vehicles, including two Cromwell tanks, but that attack also failed.

#### Jerusalem

In Jerusalem, the IDF and the Irgun and Lehi contingents in the city launched Operation Kedem with the aim of securing the Old City of Jerusalem. The IDF, Irgun, and Lehi initially captured a number of locations adjacent to Jerusalem prior to launching the main assault. On 16–17 July, the IDF, Irgun, and Lehi launched the attack to conquer the Old City. The attack failed, although a position adjacent to the New Gate was temporarily captured.

#### Galilee

Israel launched Operation Dekel with the aim of capturing the Lower Galilee from the Arab Liberation Army and local irregulars. The IDF advanced throughout the Lower Galilee, overcoming weak resistance, beating back ineffective ALA counterattacks, and capturing numerous villages. Druze communities were taken without a fight as the Druze had decided to throw their lot in with Israel. On 16 July, Nazareth fell to the IDF with only minimal resistance. The IDF subsequently advanced north, capturing more villages, although a thrust to the east to Sakhnin met an ALA counterattack that resulted in an IDF withdrawal.

In the Easern Galilee, the IDF took Kafr Sabt, west of the Sea of Galilee, on 9–10 July. In response, the ALA launched a series of attacks to take Ilaniya. The ALA threw most of its energies into the effort, deploying infantry, armored cars, and an artillery battery, which enabled the easy conquests of Operation Dekel. The ALA's repeated attacks on Ilaniya during 11–16 July were repulsed with heavy losses. On 18 July, just before the second truce came into effect, the IDF captured Lubya. In the Western Galilee, the IDF failed to take the villages of Tarshiha and Mi'ilya.

The IDF launched Operation Brosh as a brigade-sized operation to dislodge Syrian forces from the Eastern Galilee and the Benot Yaakov Bridge. The Israelis and Syrians each launched a series of attacks and counterattacks with ground repeatedly changing hands. The Israelis gained some ground but failed to dislodge the Syrians, who remained in the area until the 1949 armistice. The IDF lost 95 killed and about 200 wounded, and estimated that Syrian losses were twice as high.

#### Air operations

As in the first round of fighting, air operations during the Ten Days had minimal military impact, although they affected morale. The most significant air attack during this period was the Israeli bombing of Cairo. Three B-17 bombers that had been acquired by the Haganah in the United States and flown to Czechoslovakia for outfitting and arming flew to Israel on 15 July with orders to bomb Egyptian targets en route. One B-17 bombed Cairo, aiming for Abdeen Palace. The bombs missed their target but caused damage nearby, including to a railway line, and killed 30 people. The two other B-17s bombed Rafah. The Egyptians responded with raids on Tel Aviv by Dakota aircraft accompanied by a Spitfire fighter escort, killing at least 15 people. One Egyptian Dakota was lost. Subsequently, the Israeli Air Force bombed El Arish and Syrian positions near Mishmar HaYarden with the B-17s. An Israeli Dakota also bombed Damascus, which was followed up by another raid on Damascus by an Israeli B-17 which aimed at Mezzeh Air Base but hit civilian areas. Dozens of people were killed in these attacks.

In addition, Israeli Air Force fighter aircraft flew ground support missions and on occasion intercepted Egyptian aircraft. Syrian aircraft also launched attacks in the Mishmar HaYarden area. Arab air forces were almost completely ineffective during this period.

### Second truce: 18 July – 15 October 1948

At 19:00 on 18 July, the second truce of the conflict went into effect after intense diplomatic efforts by the UN. It lasted until 15 October.

During the truce, especially during the first days, both sides tried to improve their tactical positions. The Egyptians also violated the terms of the truce by blocking supply convoys to Israeli settlements in the Negev. As a result, numerous exchanges of fire took place. The Israelis also launched three large-scale efforts to push through supply convoys to their settlement enclave, one of which succeeded.

On 16 September, Count Folke Bernadotte proposed a new partition for Palestine in which the Negev would be divided between Jordan and Egypt, and Jordan would annexe Lydda and Ramla. There would be a Jewish state in the whole of Galilee, with the frontier running from Faluja northeast towards Ramla and Lydda. Jerusalem would be internationalised, with municipal autonomy for the city's Jewish and Arab inhabitants, the Port of Haifa would be a free port, and Lydda Airport would be a free airport. All Palestinian refugees would be granted the right of return, and those who chose not to return would be compensated for lost property. The UN would control and regulate Jewish immigration.

The plan was once again rejected by both sides. On the next day, 17 September, Bernadotte was assassinated in Jerusalem by the militant Zionist group Lehi. A four-man team ambushed Bernadotte's motorcade in Jerusalem, killing him and a French UN observer sitting next to him. Lehi saw Bernadotte as a British and Arab puppet, and thus a serious threat to the emerging State of Israel, and feared that the provisional Israeli government would accept the plan, which it considered disastrous. Unbeknownst to Lehi, the government had already decided to reject it and resume combat in a month. Bernadotte's deputy, American Ralph Bunche, replaced him.

On 22 September 1948, the Provisional State Council of Israel passed the Area of Jurisdiction and Powers Ordinance, 5708–1948, applying Israeli jurisdiction to all areas of Palestine taken since the war began. It also declared that from then on, any part of Palestine defined by the Defense Minister as being held by the IDF would be added to Israeli jurisdiction.

### Little Triangle pocket

The Arab villagers of the area known as the "Little Triangle" south of Haifa repeatedly fired at Israeli traffic along the main road from Tel Aviv to Haifa and were supplied by the Iraqis from northern Samaria. The sniping at traffic continued during the second truce. Poorly planned assaults on 18 June and 8 July had failed to dislodge Arab militia from their superior positions. The Israelis decided to launch an offensive during the truce. Ben-Gurion believed that since the Little Triangle lay within the boundaries of the Jewish state in the UN partition plan, Israel would have legitimacy to take military action there during the truce and define it as an internal police action. After several days of intermittent aerial and artillery attacks, the IDF launched Operation Shoter ("Operation Policeman") against the Little Triangle on 24 July in order to gain control of the main road to Haifa and to destroy all the enemy in the area.

Israeli assaults on 24 and 25 July were beaten back with stiff resistance. The Israelis then broke the Arab defenses with a combined infantry and armor assault backed by heavy shelling and bombing. Three Arab villages surrendered, and most of the inhabitants fled before and during the attack. Most of the inhabitants fled before and during the attack, reaching northern Samaria; hundreds were forcibly expelled during the following days. At least a hundred militiamen and civilians were killed.

The Little Triangle was the final Arab pocket on the Tel Aviv-Haifa road. With its capture, traffic along the road was restored, as was railway traffic between Haifa and Hadera.

### Third phase: 15 October 1948 – 10 March 1949

Israel launched a series of military operations to drive out the Arab armies and secure the northern and southern borders of Israel.

#### Northern front – Galilee

On 22 October, the third truce went into effect. Irregular Arab forces refused to recognise the truce, and continued to harass Israeli forces and settlements in the north. On the same day that the truce came into effect, the Arab Liberation Army violated the truce by attacking Manara, capturing the strongpoint of Sheikh Abed, repulsing counterattacks by local Israeli units, and ambushing Israeli forces attempting to relieve Manara. The IDF's Carmeli Brigade lost 33 dead and 40 wounded. Manara and Misgav Am were totally cut off, and Israel's protests at the UN failed to change the situation.

On 24 October, the IDF launched Operation Hiram and captured the entire upper Galilee area, driving the ALA back to Lebanon, and ambushing and destroying an entire Syrian battalion. The Israeli force of four infantry brigades was commanded by Moshe Carmel. The entire operation lasted just 60 hours, during which numerous villages were captured, often after locals or Arab forces put up resistance. Arab losses were estimated at 400 dead and 550 taken prisoner, with low Israeli casualties.

Some prisoners were reportedly executed by the Israeli forces. An estimated 50,000 Palestinian refugees fled into Lebanon, some of them fleeing ahead of the advancing forces, and some expelled from villages which had resisted, while the Arab inhabitants of those villages which had remained at peace were allowed to remain and became Israeli citizens. The villagers of Iqrit and Birim were persuaded to leave their homes by Israeli authorities, who promised them that they would be allowed to return. Israel eventually decided not to allow them to return, and offered them financial compensation, which they refused to accept.

At the end of the month, the IDF had captured the whole of Galilee, driven all ALA forces out of Israel, and had advanced 8 kilometres (5 miles) into Lebanon to the Litani River, occupying thirteen Lebanese villages. In the Lebanese village of Hula, two Israeli officers killed between 35 and 58 prisoners as retaliation for the Haifa Oil Refinery massacre. Both officers were later put on trial for their actions.

#### Negev

Israel launched a series of military operations to drive out the Arab armies and secure the borders of Israel. However, invading the West Bank might have brought into the borders of the expanding State of Israel a massive Arab population it could not absorb. The Negev desert was an empty space for expansion, so the main war effort shifted to Negev from early October. Israel decided to destroy or at least drive out the Egyptian expeditionary force since the Egyptian front lines were too vulnerable as permanent borders.

On 15 October, the IDF launched Operation Yoav in the northern Negev. Its goal was to drive a wedge between the Egyptian forces along the coast and the Beersheba-Hebron-Jerusalem road and ultimately to conquer the whole Negev. This was a special concern on the Israeli part because of a British diplomatic campaign to have the entire Negev handed over to Egypt and Jordan, and which thus made Ben-Gurion anxious to have Israeli forces in control of the Negev as soon as possible.

Operation Yoav was headed by the Southern Front commander Yigal Allon. Committed to Yoav were three infantry and one armoured brigades, who were given the task of breaking through the Egyptian lines. The Egyptian positions were badly weakened by the lack of a defence in depth, which meant that once the IDF had broken through the Egyptian lines, there was little to stop them. The operation was a huge success, shattering the Egyptian ranks and forcing the Egyptian Army from the northern Negev, Beersheba and Ashdod.

In the so-called "Faluja Pocket", an encircled Egyptian force was able to hold out for four months until the 1949 Armistice Agreements, when the village was peacefully transferred to Israel and the Egyptian troops left. Four warships of the Israeli Navy provided support by bombarding Egyptian shore installations in the Ashkelon area, and preventing the Egyptian Navy from evacuating retreating Egyptian troops by sea.

On 19 October, Operation Ha-Har began in the Jerusalem Corridor, while a naval battle also took place near Majdal, with three Israeli corvettes facing an Egyptian corvette with air support. An Israeli sailor was killed and four wounded, and two of the ships were damaged. One Egyptian plane was shot down, but the corvette escaped. Israeli naval vessels also shelled Majdal on 17 October, and Gaza on 21 October, with air support from the Israeli Air Force. The same day, the IDF captured Beersheba, and took 120 Egyptian soldiers prisoner. On 22 October, Israeli naval commandos using explosive boats sank the Egyptian flagship *Emir Farouk*, and damaged an Egyptian minesweeper.

On 9 November 1948, the IDF launched Operation Shmone to capture the Tegart fort in the village of Iraq Suwaydan. The fort's Egyptian defenders had previously repulsed eight attempts to take it, including two during Operation Yoav. Israeli forces bombarded the fort before an assault with artillery and airstrikes by B-17 bombers. After breaching the outlying fences without resistance, the Israelis blew a hole in the fort's outer wall, prompting the 180 Egyptian soldiers manning the fort to surrender without a fight. The defeat prompted the Egyptians to evacuate several nearby positions, including hills the IDF had failed to take by force. Meanwhile, IDF forces took Iraq Suwaydan itself after a fierce battle, losing 6 dead and 14 wounded.

From 5 to 7 December, the IDF conducted Operation Assaf to take control of the Western Negev. The main assaults were spearheaded by mechanised forces, while Golani Brigade infantry covered the rear. An Egyptian counterattack was repulsed. The Egyptians planned another counterattack, but it failed after Israeli aerial reconnaissance revealed Egyptian preparations, and the Israelis launched a preemptive strike. About 100 Egyptians were killed, and 5 tanks were destroyed, with the Israelis losing 5 killed and 30 wounded. On 22 December, the IDF launched Operation Horev, also called Operation Ayin. The goal of the operation was to drive all remaining Egyptian forces from the Negev, destroying the Egyptian threat on Israel's southern communities and forcing the Egyptians into a ceasefire. During five days of fighting, the Israelis secured the Western Negev, expelling all Egyptian forces from the area.

Israeli forces subsequently launched raids into the Nitzana area, and entered the Sinai Peninsula on 28 December. The IDF captured Umm Katef and Abu Ageila, and advanced north towards Al Arish, with the goal of encircling the entire Egyptian expeditionary force. Israeli forces pulled out of the Sinai on 2 January 1949 following joint British-American pressure and a British threat of military action. IDF forces regrouped at the border with the Gaza Strip. Israeli forces attacked Rafah the following day, and after several days of fighting, Egyptian forces in the Gaza Strip were surrounded. The Egyptians agreed to negotiate a ceasefire on 7 January, and the IDF subsequently pulled out of Gaza. According to Morris, "the inequitable and unfair rules of engagement: the Arabs could launch offensives with impunity, but international interventions always hampered and restrained Israel's counterattacks."

On 28 December, the Alexandroni Brigade failed to take the Falluja Pocket, but managed to seize Iraq el-Manshiyeh and temporarily hold it. The Egyptians counterattacked, but were mistaken for a friendly force and allowed to advance, trapping a large number of men. The Israelis lost 87 soldiers.

On 5 March, Operation Uvda was launched following nearly a month of reconnaissance, with the goal of securing the Southern Negev from Jordan. The IDF entered and secured the territory, but did not meet significant resistance along the way, as the area was already designated to be part of the Jewish state in the UN Partition Plan, and the operation meant to establish Israeli sovereignty over the territory rather than actually conquer it. The Golani, Negev, and Alexandroni brigades participated in the operation, together with some smaller units and with naval support.

On 10 March, Israeli forces secured the Southern Negev, reaching the southern tip of Palestine: Umm Rashrash on the Red Sea (where Eilat was built later) and taking it without a battle. Israeli soldiers raised a hand-made Israeli flag ("The Ink Flag") at 16:00 on 10 March, claiming Umm Rashrash for Israel. The raising of the Ink Flag is considered to be the end of the war.

#### Anglo-Israeli air clashes

As the fighting progressed and Israel mounted an incursion into the Sinai, the Royal Air Force began conducting almost daily reconnaissance missions over Israel and the Sinai. RAF reconnaissance aircraft took off from Egyptian airbases and sometimes flew alongside Royal Egyptian Air Force planes. High-flying British aircraft frequently flew over Haifa and Ramat David Airbase, and became known to the Israelis as the "shuftykeit".

On 20 November 1948, an unarmed RAF photo-reconnaissance De Havilland Mosquito of No. 13 Squadron RAF was shot down by an Israeli Air Force P-51 Mustang flown by American volunteer Wayne Peake as it flew over the Galilee towards Hatzor Airbase. Peake opened fire with his cannons, causing a fire to break out in the port engine. The aircraft turned to sea and lowered its altitude, then exploded and crashed off Ashdod. The pilot and navigator were both killed.

Just before noon on 7 January 1949, four Spitfire FR18s from No. 208 Squadron RAF on a reconnaissance mission in the Deir al-Balah area flew over an Israeli convoy that had been attacked by five Egyptian Spitfires fifteen minutes earlier. The pilots had spotted smoking vehicles and were drawn to the scene out of curiosity. Two planes dived to below 500 feet altitude to take pictures of the convoy, while the remaining two covered them from 1,500 feet.

Israeli soldiers on the ground, alerted by the sound of the approaching Spitfires and fearing another Egyptian air attack, opened fire with machine guns. One Spitfire was shot down by a tank-mounted machine gun, while the other was lightly damaged and rapidly pulled up. The remaining three Spitfires were then attacked by patrolling IAF Spitfires flown by Chalmers Goodlin and John McElroy, volunteers from the United States and Canada respectively. All three Spitfires were shot down, and one pilot was killed.

Two pilots were captured by Israeli soldiers and taken to Tel Aviv for interrogation, and were later released. Another was rescued by Bedouins and handed over to the Egyptian Army, which turned him over to the RAF. Later that day, four RAF Spitfires from the same squadron escorted by seven Hawker Tempests from No. 213 Squadron RAF and eight from No. 6 Squadron RAF went searching for the lost planes, and were attacked by four IAF Spitfires. The Israeli formation was led by Ezer Weizman. The remaining three were manned by Weizman's wingman Alex Jacobs and American volunteers Bill Schroeder and Caesar Dangott.

The Tempests found they could not jettison their external fuel tanks, and some had non-operational guns. Schroeder shot down a British Tempest, killing pilot David Tattersfield, and Weizman severely damaged a British plane flown by Douglas Liquorish. Weizman's plane and two other British aircraft suffered light damage during the engagement. During the battle, British Tempest pilots treated British Spitfires as potential Israeli aircraft until the British Spitfire pilots were told by radio to wiggle their wings to be more clearly identifiable. The engagement ended when the Israelis realised the danger of their situation and disengaged, returning to Hatzor Airbase.

Israeli prime minister David Ben-Gurion personally ordered the wrecks of the RAF fighters that had been shot down to be dragged into Israeli territory. Israeli troops subsequently visited the crash sites, removed various parts, and buried the other aircraft. However, the Israelis did not manage to conceal the wrecks in time to prevent British reconnaissance planes from photographing them. An RAF salvage team was deployed to recover the wrecks, entering Israeli territory during their search. Two were discovered inside Egypt, while Tattersfield's Tempest was found north of Nirim, 6 km (4 mi) inside Israel. Interviews with local Arabs confirmed that the Israelis had visited the crash sites to remove and bury the wrecks. Tattersfield was initially buried near the wreckage, but his body was later removed and reburied at the British War Cemetery in Ramla.

In response, the RAF readied all Tempests and Spitfires to attack any IAF aircraft they encountered and bomb IAF airfields. British troops in the Middle East were placed on high alert with all leave cancelled, and British citizens were advised to leave Israel. The Royal Navy was placed on high alert. At Hatzor Airbase, the general consensus among the pilots, most of whom had flown with or alongside the RAF during World War II, was that the RAF would not allow the loss of five aircraft and two pilots to go without retaliation, and would probably attack the base at dawn the next day. That night, in anticipation of an impending British attack, some pilots decided not to offer any resistance and left the base, while others prepared their Spitfires and were strapped into the cockpits at dawn, preparing to repel a retaliatory airstrike. However, despite pressure from the squadrons involved in the incidents, British commanders refused to authorise any retaliatory strikes.

The day following the incident, British pilots were issued a directive to regard any Israeli aircraft infiltrating Egyptian or Jordanian airspace as hostile and to shoot them down, but were also ordered to avoid activity close to Israel's borders. Later in January 1949, the British managed to prevent the delivery of aviation spirit and other essential fuels to Israel in retaliation for the incident. The British Foreign Office presented the Israeli government with a demand for compensation over the loss of personnel and equipment.

#### UN Resolution 194

In December 1948, the UN General Assembly passed Resolution 194. It called to establish a UN Conciliation Commission to facilitate peace between Israel and Arab states. However, many of the resolution's articles were not fulfilled, since these were opposed by Israel, rejected by the Arab states, or were overshadowed by war as the 1948 conflict continued.


## Weapons

Both sides utilized weapons that had been used in World War II by the British and French forces. Egypt's arsenal included leftover British equipment, while the Syrian arsenal included leftover French weaponry. The Israeli Defense Forces utilized an array of British, American, French and Czechoslovak military equipment. In addition to the aforementioned, the IDF also used several Davidka mortars, which were a domestically produced weapon by Israel.

According to Amitzur Ilan, "Israel's ability to cope better with the embargo situation was, by far, her greatest strategic asset."

| Type | Arab armies | IDF |
|---|---|---|
| Tanks | Matilda tanks, R-39s, FT-17s, R35s, Panzer IVs (dug in and used as stationary gun emplacements by Egypt), Fiat M13/40, Sherman M4, M-22, Vickers MK-6. | Cromwell tanks, H39s, M4 Sherman |
| APCs/IFVs | British World War II era trucks, Humber Mk III & IV, Automitrailleuses Dodge/Bich type, improvised armored cars/trucks, Marmon-Herrington Armoured Cars, Universal Carriers, Lloyd Towing Carriers | British World War II era trucks, improvised armored cars/trucks, White M3A1 Scout Cars, Daimler Armoured Cars, Universal Carriers, M3 Half-tracks, IHC M14 Half-tracks, M5 Half-tracks |
| Artillery | Mortars, 15 cm sIG33 auf Pz IIs, 25 mm anti-tank guns on Bren carriers, improvised self-propelled guns used by Syrians in 1948–49, 65 mm mountain guns on Lorraine 38L *chenillettes*, 2-pounder anti-tank guns, 6-pounder anti-tank guns | Mortars, 2-inch (51 mm) British mortars, 65 mm French howitzers (*Napoleonchiks*), 120 mm French mortars, Davidka mortars |
| Aircraft | Spitfires, T-6 Texans, C-47 Dakotas, Hawker Hurricanes, Avro Ansons | Spitfires, Avia S-199s, B-17 Flying Fortresses, P-51 Mustangs, C-47 Dakotas |
| Small Arms | Lee–Enfield rifles, Bren Guns, Sten guns, MAS 36s | Sten guns, Mills grenades, Karabiner 98k (Czech copies), Bren Guns, MP 40s, MG-34 Machine guns, Thompson submachine guns, Lee–Enfield rifles, Molotov cocktails, PIAT anti-tank infantry weapon |


## Aftermath

### 1949 Armistice Agreements

In 1949, Israel signed separate armistices with Egypt on 24 February, Lebanon on 23 March, Transjordan on 3 April, and Syria on 20 July. The Armistice Demarcation Lines, as set by the agreements, saw the territory under Israeli control encompassing approximately three-quarters of the prior British administered Mandate as it stood after Transjordan's independence in 1946. Israel controlled territories of about one-third more than was allocated to the Jewish State under the UN partition proposal. After the armistices, Israel had control over 78% of the territory of former Mandatory Palestine or some 21,000 km2 (8,000 sq mi), including the entire Galilee and Jezreel Valley in the north, the whole Negev in south, West Jerusalem and the coastal plain in the center.

The armistice lines were known afterwards as the "Green Line". The Gaza Strip and the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) were occupied by Egypt and Transjordan respectively. The United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and Mixed Armistice Commissions were set up to monitor ceasefires, supervise the armistice agreements, to prevent isolated incidents from escalating, and assist other UN peacekeeping operations in the region.

Just before the signing of the Israel-Transjordan armistice agreement, general Yigal Allon proposed a military offensive to conquer the West Bank up to the Jordan River as the natural, defensible border of the state. Ben-Gurion refused, although he was aware that the IDF was militarily strong enough to carry out the conquest. He feared the reaction of Western powers and wanted to maintain good relations with the United States and not to provoke the British. Moreover, the results of the war were already satisfactory and Israeli leaders had to build a state.

### Casualties

Israel lost 6,373 of its people, about 1% of its population at the time, in the war. About 4,000 were soldiers and the rest were civilians.

The exact number of Arab casualties is unknown. One estimate places the Arab death toll at 7,000, including 3,000 Palestinians, 2,000 Egyptians, 1,000 Jordanians, and 1,000 Syrians. In 1958, Palestinian historian Aref al-Aref calculated that the Arab armies' combined losses amounted to 3,700, with Egypt losing 961 regular and 200 irregular soldiers and Transjordan losing 362 regulars and 200 irregulars. According to Henry Laurens, the Palestinians suffered double the Jewish losses, with 13,000 dead, 1,953 of whom are known to have died in combat situations. Of the remainder, 4,004 remain nameless but the place, tally and date of their death is known, and a further 7,043, for whom only the place of death is known, not their identities nor the date of their death. According to Laurens, the largest part of Palestinian casualties consisted of non-combatants and corresponds to the successful operations of the Israelis.

### Demographic outcomes

#### Arabs

During the 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine and the 1948 Arab–Israeli War that followed, around 750,000 Palestinian Arabs fled or were expelled from their homes, out of approximately 1,200,000 Arabs living in former British Mandate of Palestine, a displacement known to Palestinians as the *Nakba*. In 1951, the UN Conciliation Commission for Palestine estimated that the number of Palestinian refugees displaced from Israel was 711,000.

This number did not include displaced Palestinians inside Israeli-held territory. More than 400 Arab villages, and about ten Jewish villages and neighbourhoods, were depopulated during the Arab–Israeli conflict, most of them during 1948. According to estimate based on earlier census, the total Muslim population in Palestine was 1,143,336 in 1947. The causes of the 1948 Palestinian exodus are a controversial topic among historians. After the war, around 156,000 Arabs remained in Israel and became Israeli citizens.

Displaced Palestinian Arabs, known as Palestinian refugees, were settled in Palestinian refugee camps throughout the Arab world. The United Nations established UNRWA as a relief and human development agency tasked with providing humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees. Arab nations refused to absorb Palestinian refugees, instead keeping them in refugee camps while insisting that they be allowed to return.

Refugee status was also passed on to their descendants, who were also largely denied citizenship in Arab states, except in Transjordan. The Arab League instructed its members to deny Palestinians citizenship "to avoid dissolution of their identity and protect their right of return to their homeland." More than 1.4 million Palestinians still live in 58 recognised refugee camps, while more than 5 million Palestinians live outside Israel and the Palestinian territories.

Palestinian refugees and displaced persons and the lack of a Palestinian right of return remain major issues in the Arab–Israeli conflict.

#### Jews

In the three years from May 1948 to the end of 1951, 700,000 Jews settled in Israel, mainly along the borders and in former Arab lands, doubling the Jewish population there. Of these, upwards of 300,000 arrived from Asian and North African states. Among them, the largest group, over 100,000, was from Iraq. The remaining came mostly from Europe, including 136,000 from the 250,000 displaced Jews of World War II living in refugee camps and urban centers in Germany, Austria, and Italy, and more than 270,000 coming from Eastern Europe, mainly Romania and Poland, over 100,000 each.

On the establishment of the state, a top priority was given to a policy for the "ingathering of exiles", and the Mossad LeAliyah Bet gave key assistance to the Jewish Agency to organise immigrants from Europe and the Middle East, and arrange for their transport to Israel. For Ben-Gurion, a fundamental defect of the State was that "it lacked Jews".

Jewish immigrants from Arab and Muslim countries left for numerous reasons. The war's outcome had exacerbated Arab hostilities to local Jewish communities. News of the victory aroused messianic expectations in Libya and Yemen; Zionism had taken root in many countries; active incentives for making aliyah formed a key part of Israeli policy; and better economic prospects and security were to be expected from a Jewish state.

Some Arab governments, Egypt, for example, held their Jewish communities hostage at times. Persecution, political instability, and news of a number of violent pogroms also played a role. Some 800,000–1,000,000 Jews eventually left the Arab world over the next three decades as a result of these various factors. An estimated 650,000 of the departees settled in Israel.

Israeli historian Benny Morris wrote that "the experience of discrimination and persecution in the Arab world, and the centuries of subjection and humiliation that preceded 1948 ... [left] a deep dislike, indeed hatred, of that world among [first generation Mizrahim] and their descendants." He states this has consequences in the Israeli political realm both in terms of negative views of Arabs and "hard-line, right-wing voting patterns." In his view these are a long lasting indirect consequence of the war.
