---
title: "C++11 (part 3/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11
domain: catch2-cpp-lib
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: catch2 testing, cpp test framework, catch2 header only, catch2 test cases
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 3/4
---

# C++11

C++11 also adds the ability to prevent inheriting from classes or simply preventing overriding methods in derived classes. This is done with the special identifier `final`. For example:

```mw
struct Base final {
    // ...
};

// ill-formed because the class Base has been marked final
struct Derived : public Base {
    // ...
};
```

```mw
struct Base {
    virtual void foo() final;
};

struct Derived : public Base {
    void foo(); // ill-formed because the virtual function Base::foo has been marked final
};
```

In this example, the `virtual void foo() final;` statement declares a new virtual function, but it also prevents derived classes from overriding it. It also has the effect of preventing derived classes from using that particular function name and parameter combination.

Neither `override` nor `final` are language keywords. They are technically identifiers for declarator attributes:

- they gain special meaning as attributes only when used in those specific trailing contexts (after all type specifiers, access specifiers, member declarations (for struct, class and enum types) and declarator specifiers, but before initialization or code implementation of each declarator in a comma-separated list of declarators);
- they do not alter the declared type signature and do not declare or override any new identifier in any scope;
- the recognized and accepted declarator attributes may be extended in future versions of C++ (some compiler-specific extensions already recognize added declarator attributes, to provide code generation options or optimization hints to the compiler, or to generate added data into the compiled code, intended for debuggers, linkers, and deployment of the compiled code, or to provide added system-specific security attributes, or to enhance reflective programming (reflection) abilities at runtime, or to provide added binding information for interoperability with other programming languages and runtime systems; these extensions may take parameters between parentheses after the declarator attribute identifier; for ANSI conformance, these compiler-specific extensions should use the double underscore prefix convention).
- In any other location, they can be valid identifiers for new declarations (and later use if they are accessible).

#### Null pointer constant and type

For the purposes of this section and this section alone, every occurrence of "`0`" is meant as "a constant expression which evaluates to `0`, which is of type int". In reality, the constant expression can be of any integral type.

Since the dawn of C in 1972, the constant `0` has had the double role of constant integer and null pointer constant. The ambiguity inherent in the double meaning of `0` was dealt with in C by using the preprocessor macro `NULL`, which commonly expands to either `((void*)0)` or `0`. C++ forbids implicit conversion from `void*` to other pointer types, thus removing the benefit of casting `0` to `void*`. As a consequence, only `0` is allowed as a null pointer constant. This interacts poorly with function overloading:

```mw
void foo(char* s);
void foo(int i);
```

If `NULL` is defined as `0` (which is usually the case in C++), the statement `foo(NULL);` will call `foo(int i)`, which is almost certainly not what the programmer intended, and not what a superficial reading of the code suggests.

C++11 corrects this by introducing a new keyword to serve as a distinguished null pointer constant: `nullptr`. It is of type `nullptr_t`, which is implicitly convertible and comparable to any pointer type or pointer-to-member type. It is not implicitly convertible or comparable to integral types, except for `bool`. While the original proposal specified that an rvalue of type `nullptr_t` should not be convertible to `bool`, the core language working group decided that such a conversion would be desirable, for consistency with regular pointer types. The proposed wording changes were unanimously voted into the Working Paper in June 2008.[1] A similar proposal was also brought to the C standard working group and was accepted for inclusion in C23.

For backwards compatibility reasons, `0` remains a valid null pointer constant.

```mw
char* pc = nullptr; // OK
int* pi = nullptr; // OK
bool b = nullptr; // OK. b is false.
int i = nullptr; // error

foo(nullptr); // calls foo(nullptr_t p), not foo(int i);
/*
  Note that foo(nullptr_t p) will actually call foo(char* s) in the example above using an implicit conversion,
  only if no other functions are overloading with compatible pointer types in scope.
  If multiple overloadings exist, the resolution will fail as it is ambiguous,
  unless there is an explicit declaration of foo(nullptr_t p).

  In standard types headers for C++11, the nullptr_t type should be declared as:
      using nullptr_t = decltype(nullptr);
  but not as:
      using nullptr_t = int; // prior versions of C++ which need NULL to be defined as 0
      using nullptr_t = void*; // ANSI C which defines NULL as ((void*)0)
*/
```

#### Strongly typed enumerations

In C++03, enumerations are not type-safe. They are effectively integers, even when the enumeration types are distinct. This allows the comparison between two enum values of different enumeration types. The only safety that C++03 provides is that an integer or a value of one enum type does not convert implicitly to another enum type. Further, the underlying integral type is implementation-defined; code that depends on the size of the enumeration is thus non-portable. Lastly, enumeration values are scoped to the enclosing scope. Thus, it is not possible for two separate enumerations in the same scope to have matching member names.

C++11 allows a special classification of enumeration that has none of these issues. This is expressed using the `enum class` (`enum struct` is also accepted as a synonym) declaration:

```mw
enum class CardSuit {
    CLUBS = 1,
    HEARTS = 2,
    DIAMONDS = 4,
    SPADES = 8
};
```

This enumeration is type-safe. Enum class values are not implicitly converted to integers. Thus, they cannot be compared to integers either (the expression `CardSuit::SPADES == 8` gives a compile error).

The underlying type of enum classes is always known. The default type is `int`; this can be overridden to a different integral type as can be seen in this example:

```mw
enum class Direction : char {
    UP, 
    DOWN,
    LEFT,
    RIGHT
};
```

With old-style enumerations the values are placed in the outer scope. With new-style enumerations they are placed within the scope of the enum class name. So in the above example, `UP` is undefined, but `Direction::UP` is defined.

There is also a transitional syntax to allow old-style enumerations to provide explicit scoping, and the definition of the underlying type:

```mw
enum Direction : char {
    UP, 
    DOWN,
    LEFT,
    RIGHT
};
```

In this case the enumerator names are defined in the enumeration's scope (`Direction::UP`), but for backwards compatibility they are also placed in the enclosing scope.

Forward-declaring enums is also possible in C++11. Formerly, enum types could not be forward-declared because the size of the enumeration depends on the definition of its members. As long as the size of the enumeration is specified either implicitly or explicitly, it can be forward-declared:

```mw
enum Enum1;                      // Invalid in C++03 and C++11; the underlying type cannot be determined.
enum Enum2 : unsigned int;       // Valid in C++11, the underlying type is specified explicitly.
enum class Enum3;                // Valid in C++11, the underlying type is int.
enum class Enum4 : unsigned int; // Valid in C++11.
enum Enum2 : unsigned short;     // Invalid in C++11, because Enum2 was formerly declared with a different underlying type.
```

#### Right angle bracket

C++03's parser defines “`>>`” as the right shift operator or stream extraction operator in all cases. However, with nested template declarations, there is a tendency for the programmer to neglect to place a space between the two right angle brackets, thus causing a compiler syntax error.

C++11 improves the specification of the parser so that multiple right angle brackets will be interpreted as closing the template argument list where it is reasonable. This can be overridden by using parentheses around parameter expressions using the “`>`”, “`>=`” or “`>>`” binary operators:

```mw
using std::vector;

template <bool Test> 
class X;
vector<X<1>2>> x1;  
// Interpreted as a std::vector of X<true>,
// followed by "2 >> x1", which is not valid syntax for a declarator. 1 is true.

vector<X<(1>2)>> x1;
// Interpreted as std::vector of X<false>,
// followed by the declarator "x1", which is valid C++11 syntax. (1>2) is false.
```

#### Explicit conversion operators

C++98 added the `explicit` keyword as a modifier on constructors to prevent single-argument constructors from being used as implicit type conversion operators. However, this does nothing for actual conversion operators. For example, a smart pointer class may have an `operator bool()` to allow it to act more like a primitive pointer: if it includes this conversion, it can be tested with `if (p)` (which would be true if the pointer was non-null and false otherwise). However, this allows other, unintended conversions as well. Because C++ `bool` is defined as an arithmetic type, it can be implicitly converted to integral or even floating-point types, which allows for mathematical operations that are not intended by the user.

In C++11, the `explicit` keyword can now be applied to conversion operators. As with constructors, it prevents using those conversion functions in implicit conversions. However, language contexts that specifically need a Boolean value (the conditions of if-statements and loops, and operands to the logical operators) count as explicit conversions and can thus use a bool conversion operator.

For example, this feature solves cleanly the safe bool issue.

#### Template aliases

In C++03, it is possible to define a typedef only as a synonym for another type, including a synonym for a template specialization with all actual template arguments specified. It is not possible to create a typedef template. For example:

```mw
template <typename First, typename Second, int Third>
class X;

template <typename Second>
typedef X<A, Second, 5> Y; // Invalid in C++03
```

This will not compile.

C++11 adds this ability with this syntax:

```mw
template <typename First, typename Second, int Third>
class X;

template <typename Second>
using Y = X<A, Second, 5>;
```

The `using` syntax can also be used as type aliasing in C++11:

```mw
typedef void(*FunctionType)(double); // Old style
using FunctionType = void(*)(double); // New introduced syntax
```

#### Unrestricted unions

In C++03, there are restrictions on what types of objects can be members of a `union`. For example, unions cannot contain any objects that define a non-trivial constructor or destructor. C++11 lifts some of these restrictions.[2]

If a `union` member has a non trivial special member function, the compiler will not generate the equivalent member function for the `union` and it must be manually defined.

This is a simple example of a union permitted in C++11:

```mw
#include <new> // Needed for placement 'new'.

struct Point {
    int a;
    int b;

    Point() {}
    Point(int x, int y): 
        x(a), y(b) {} 
};

union MyUnion {
    int z;
    double w;
    Point p; // Invalid in C++03; valid in C++11.

    // Due to the Point member, a constructor definition is now needed.
    MyUnion() {}

    MyUnion(const Point& pt): 
        p(pt) {} // Construct Point object using initializer list.

    MyUnion& operator=(const Point& pt) { 
        // Assign Point object using placement 'new'.
        new(&p) Point(pt);
        return *this; 
    }
};
```

The changes will not break any existing code since they only relax current rules.

### Core language functionality improvements

These features allow the language to do things that were formerly impossible, exceedingly verbose, or needed non-portable libraries.

#### Variadic templates

In C++11, templates can take variable numbers of template parameters. This also allows the definition of type-safe variadic functions.

#### New string literals

C++03 offers two kinds of string literals. The first kind, contained within double quotes, produces a null-terminated array of type `const char`. The second kind, defined as `L""`, produces a null-terminated array of type `const wchar_t`, where `wchar_t` is a wide-character of undefined size and semantics. Neither literal type offers support for string literals with UTF-8, UTF-16, or any other kind of Unicode encodings.

C++11 supports three Unicode encodings: UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. The definition of the type `char` has been modified to explicitly express that it is at least the size needed to store an eight-bit coding of UTF-8, and large enough to contain any member of the compiler's basic execution character set. It was formerly defined as only the latter in the C++ standard itself, then relying on the C standard to guarantee at least 8 bits. Furthermore, C++11 adds two new character types: `char16_t` and `char32_t`. These are designed to store UTF-16 and UTF-32 respectively.

Creating string literals for each of the supported encodings can be done thus:

```mw
u8"I'm a UTF-8 string."
u"This is a UTF-16 string."
U"This is a UTF-32 string."
```

The type of the first string is the usual `const char[]`. The type of the second string is `const char16_t[]` (note lower case 'u' prefix). The type of the third string is `const char32_t[]` (upper case 'U' prefix).

When building Unicode string literals, it is often useful to insert Unicode code points directly into the string. To do this, C++11 allows this syntax:

```mw
u8"This is a Unicode Character: \u2018."
u"This is a bigger Unicode Character: \u2018."
U"This is a Unicode Character: \U00002018."
```

The number after the `\u` is a hexadecimal number; it does not need the usual `0x` prefix. The identifier `\u` represents a 16-bit Unicode code point; to enter a 32-bit code point, use `\U` and a 32-bit hexadecimal number. Only valid Unicode code points can be entered. For example, code points on the range U+D800–U+DFFF are forbidden, as they are reserved for surrogate pairs in UTF-16 encodings.

It is also sometimes useful to avoid escaping strings manually, particularly for using literals of XML files, scripting languages, or regular expressions. C++11 provides a raw string literal:

```mw
R"(The String Data \ Stuff " )"
R"delimiter(The String Data \ Stuff " )delimiter"
```

In the first case, everything between the `"(` and the `)"` is part of the string. The `"` and `\` characters do not need to be escaped. In the second case, the `"delimiter(` starts the string, and it ends only when `)delimiter"` is reached. The string `delimiter` can be any string up to 16 characters in length, including the empty string. This string cannot contain spaces, control characters, `(`, `)`, or the `\` character. Using this delimiter string, the user can have the sequence `)"` within raw string literals. For example, `R"delimiter("(a-z)")delimiter"` is equivalent to `"\"(a-z)\""`.

Raw string literals can be combined with the wide literal or any of the Unicode literal prefixes:

```mw
u8R"XXX(I'm a "raw UTF-8" string.)XXX"
uR"*(This is a "raw UTF-16" string.)*"
UR"(This is a "raw UTF-32" string.)"
```

#### User-defined literals

C++03 provides a number of literals. The characters `12.5` are a literal that is resolved by the compiler as a type `double` with the value of 12.5. However, the addition of the suffix `f`, as in `12.5f`, creates a value of type `float` that contains the value 12.5. The suffix modifiers for literals are fixed by the C++ specification, and C++03 code cannot create new literal modifiers.

By contrast, C++11 enables the user to define new kinds of literal modifiers that will construct objects based on the string of characters that the literal modifies.

Transformation of literals is redefined into two distinct phases: raw and cooked. A raw literal is a sequence of characters of some specific type, while the cooked literal is of a separate type. The C++ literal `1234`, as a raw literal, is this sequence of characters `'1'`, `'2'`, `'3'`, `'4'`. As a cooked literal, it is the integer 1234. The C++ literal `0xA` in raw form is `'0'`, `'x'`, `'A'`, while in cooked form it is the integer 10.

Literals can be extended in both raw and cooked forms, with the exception of string literals, which can be processed only in cooked form. This exception is due to the fact that strings have prefixes that affect the specific meaning and type of the characters in question.

All user-defined literals are suffixes; defining prefix literals is not possible. All suffixes starting with any character except underscore (`_`) are reserved by the standard. Thus, all user-defined literals should have suffixes starting with an underscore (`_`).

User-defined literals processing the raw form of the literal are defined via a literal operator, which is written as `operator""`. An example follows:

```mw
MyOutput operator""_suf(const char* s) {
    // assumes that MyOutput has a constructor that takes a const char*
    MyOutput ret(s);
    return ret;
}

MyOutput x = 1234_suf;
// assuming that MyOutput has a value() method that returns a double
assert(x.value() == 1234.0)
```

The assignment statement `MyOutput x = 1234_suf;` executes the code defined by the user-defined literal function. This function is passed `"1234"` as a C-style string, so it has a null terminator.

An alternative mechanism for processing integer and floating point raw literals is via a variadic template:

```mw
template <char... _> 
MyOutput operator""_suf();

MyOutput x = 1234_suf;
MyOutput y = 2.17_suf;
```

This instantiates the literal processing function as `operator""_suf<'1', '2', '3', '4'>()`. In this form, there is no null character terminating the string. The main purpose for doing this is to use C++11's `constexpr` keyword to ensure that the compiler will transform the literal entirely at compile time, assuming `MyOutput` is a constexpr-constructible and copyable type, and the literal processing function is a `constexpr` function.

For numeric literals, the type of the cooked literal is either `unsigned long long` for integral literals or `long double` for floating point literals. (Note: There is no need for signed integral types because a sign-prefixed literal is parsed as an expression containing the sign as a unary prefix operator and the unsigned number.) There is no alternative template form:

```mw
MyOutput operator""_suf(unsigned long long);
MyOutput operator""_suf(long double);

MyOutput x = 1234_suf; // Uses the 'unsigned long long' overload.
MyOutput y = 3.1416_suf; // Uses the 'long double' overload.
```

In accord with the formerly mentioned new string prefixes, for string literals, these are used:

```mw
MyOutput operator""_suf(const char* s, size_t length);
MyOutput operator""_suf(const wchar_t* s, size_t length);
MyOutput operator""_suf(const char16_t* s, size_t length);
MyOutput operator""_suf(const char32_t* s, size_t length);

MyOutput a = "1234"_suf; // Uses the 'const char*' overload.
MyOutput b = u8"1234"_suf; // Uses the 'const char*' overload.
MyOutput c = L"1234"_suf; // Uses the 'const wchar_t*' overload.
MyOutput d = u"1234"_suf; // Uses the 'const char16_t*' overload.
MyOutput e = U"1234"_suf; // Uses the 'const char32_t*' overload.
```

There is no alternative template form. Character literals are defined similarly.

#### Multithreading memory model

C++11 standardizes support for multithreaded programming.

There are two parts involved: a memory model which allows multiple threads to co-exist in a program and library support for interaction between threads. (See this article's section on threading facilities.)

The memory model defines when multiple threads may access the same memory location, and specifies when updates by one thread become visible to other threads.

#### Thread-local storage

In a multi-threaded environment, it is common for every thread to have some unique variables. This already happens for the local variables of a function, but it does not happen for global and static variables.

A new *thread-local* storage duration (in addition to the existing *static*, *dynamic* and *automatic*) is indicated by the storage specifier `thread_local`.

Any object which could have static storage duration (i.e., lifetime spanning the entire execution of the program) may be given thread-local duration instead. The intent is that like any other static-duration variable, a thread-local object can be initialized using a constructor and destroyed using a destructor.

#### Explicitly defaulted special member functions

In C++03, the compiler provides, for classes that do not provide them for themselves, a default constructor, a copy constructor, a copy assignment operator (`operator=`), and a destructor. The programmer can override these defaults by defining custom versions. C++ also defines several global operators (such as `operator new`) that work on all classes, which the programmer can override.

However, there is very little control over creating these defaults. Making a class inherently non-copyable, for example, may be done by declaring a private copy constructor and copy assignment operator and not defining them. Attempting to use these functions is a violation of the One Definition Rule (ODR). While a diagnostic message is not required, violations may result in a linker error.

In the case of the default constructor, the compiler will not generate a default constructor if a class is defined with *any* constructors. This is useful in many cases, but it is also useful to be able to have both specialized constructors and the compiler-generated default.

C++11 allows the explicit defaulting and deleting of these special member functions. For example, this class explicitly declares that a default constructor can be used:

```mw
class X {
    X() = default; // The default constructor is explicitly stated.
    X(T value);
};
```

#### Explicitly deleted functions

A function can be explicitly disabled. This is useful for preventing implicit type conversions. The `= delete` specifier can be used to prohibit calling a function with particular parameter types. For example:

```mw
void noInt(double i);
void noInt(int) = delete;
```

An attempt to call `noInt()` with an `int` parameter will be rejected by the compiler, instead of performing a silent conversion to `double`. Calling `noInt()` with a `float` still works.

It is possible to prohibit calling the function with any type other than `double` by using a template:

```mw
double onlyDouble(double d) {
    return d;
}

template <typename T>
double onlyDouble(T) = delete;
```

calling `onlyDouble(1.0)` will work, while `onlyDouble(1.0f)` will generate a compiler error.

Class member functions and constructors can also be deleted. For example, it is possible to prevent copying class objects by deleting the copy constructor and `operator =`:

```mw
class NonCopyable {
    NonCopyable();
    NonCopyable(const NonCopyable&) = delete;
    NonCopyable& operator=(const NonCopyable&) = delete;
};
```

#### Type `long long int`

In C++03, the largest integer type is `long int`. It is guaranteed to have at least as many usable bits as `int`. This resulted in `long int` having size of 64 bits on some popular implementations and 32 bits on others. C++11 adds a new integer type `long long int` to address this issue. It is guaranteed to be at least as large as a `long int`, and have no fewer than 64 bits. The type was originally introduced by C99 to the standard C, and most C++ compilers supported it as an extension already.

#### Static assertions

C++03 provides two methods to test assertions: the macro `assert` and the preprocessor directive `#error`. However, neither is appropriate for use in templates: the macro tests the assertion at execution-time, while the preprocessor directive tests the assertion during preprocessing, which happens before instantiation of templates. Neither is appropriate for testing properties that are dependent on template parameters.

The new utility introduces a new way to test assertions at compile-time, using the new keyword `static_assert`. The declaration assumes this form:

```
static_assert(constant-expression, error-message);
```

Here are some examples of how `static_assert` can be used:

```mw
static_assert((GREEK_PI > 3.14) && (GREEK_PI < 3.15), "GREEK_PI is inaccurate!");
```

```mw
template <class T>
struct Check {
    static_assert(sizeof(int) <= sizeof(T), "T is not big enough!");
};
```

```mw
using std::is_integral;

template <class Int>
Int foo(Int x, Int y) {
    static_assert(is_integral<Int>::value, "foo() parameter must be an integral type.");
}
```

When the constant expression is `false` the compiler produces an error message. The first example is similar to the preprocessor directive `#error`, although the preprocessor does only support integral types. In contrast, in the second example the assertion is checked at every instantiation of the template class `Check`.

Static assertions are useful outside of templates also. For instance, a given implementation of an algorithm might depend on the size of a `long long` being larger than an `int`, something the standard does not guarantee. Such an assumption is valid on most systems and compilers, but not all.

#### Allow `sizeof` to work on members of classes without an explicit object

In C++03, the `sizeof` operator can be used on types and objects. But it cannot be used to do this:

```mw
struct X {
    T member;
};

sizeof(X::member); // Does not work with C++03. Okay with C++11
```

This should return the size of `T`. C++03 disallows this, so it is a compile error. C++11 allows it. It is also allowed for the `alignof` operator introduced in C++11.

#### Control and query object alignment

C++11 allows variable alignment to be queried and controlled with `alignof` and `alignas`.

The `alignof` operator takes the type and returns the power of 2 byte boundary on which the type instances must be allocated (as a `std::size_t`). When given a reference type `alignof` returns the referenced type's alignment; for arrays it returns the element type's alignment.

The `alignas` specifier controls the memory alignment for a variable. The specifier takes a constant or a type; when supplied a type `alignas(T)` is shorthand for `alignas(alignof(T))`. For example, to specify that a `char[]` should be properly aligned to hold a `float`:

```mw
alignas(float) unsigned char c[sizeof(float)];
```

#### Allow garbage collected implementations

Prior C++ standards provided for programmer-driven garbage collection, but gave no definition of object reachability for the purpose of automatic garbage collection. C++11 defines conditions under which pointer values are "safely derived" from other values. An implementation may specify that it operates under *strict pointer safety*, in which case pointers that are not derived according to these rules can become invalid. This was later removed in C++23.

#### Attributes

C++11 provides a standardized syntax for compiler/tool extensions to the language. Such extensions were traditionally specified using `#pragma` directive or vendor-specific keywords (like `__attribute__` for GNU and `__declspec` for Microsoft). With the new syntax, added information can be specified in a form of an attribute enclosed in double square brackets. An attribute can be applied to various elements of source code:

```mw
int [[attr1]] i [[attr2, attr3]];

[[attr4(arg1, arg2)]] if (cond) {
    [[vendor::attr5]] return i;
}
```

In the example above, attribute `[[attr1]]` applies to the type of variable `i`, `[[attr2]]` and `[[attr3]]` apply to the variable itself, `[[attr4]]` applies to the `if` statement and `[[vendor::attr5]]` applies to the return statement. In general (but with some exceptions), an attribute specified for a named entity is placed after the name, and before the entity otherwise, as shown above, several attributes may be listed inside one pair of double square brackets, added arguments may be provided for an attribute, and attributes may be scoped by vendor-specific attribute namespaces.

It is recommended that attributes have no language semantic meaning and do not change the sense of a program when ignored. Attributes can be useful for providing information that, for example, helps the compiler to issue better diagnostics or optimize the generated code.

C++11 provides two standard attributes itself: `[[noreturn]]` to specify that a function does not return, and `[[carries_dependency]]` to help optimizing multi-threaded code by indicating that function arguments or return value carry a dependency.
