---
title: "C++11 (part 4/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11
domain: catch2-cpp-lib
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: catch2 testing, cpp test framework, catch2 header only, catch2 test cases
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 4/4
---

## C++ standard library changes

A number of new features were introduced in the C++11 standard library. Many of these could have been implemented under the old standard, but some rely (to a greater or lesser extent) on new C++11 core features.

A large part of the new libraries was defined in the document *C++ Standards Committee's Library Technical Report* (called TR1), which was published in 2005. Various full and partial implementations of TR1 are currently available using the namespace `std::tr1`. For C++11 they were moved to namespace `std`. However, as TR1 features were brought into the C++11 standard library, they were upgraded where appropriate with C++11 language features that were not available in the initial TR1 version. Also, they may have been enhanced with features that were possible under C++03, but were not part of the original TR1 specification.

### Upgrades to standard library components

C++11 offers a number of new language features that the currently existing standard library components can benefit from. For example, most standard library containers can benefit from Rvalue reference based move constructor support, both for quickly moving heavy containers around and for moving the contents of those containers to new memory locations. The standard library components were upgraded with new C++11 language features where appropriate. These include, but are not necessarily limited to:

- Rvalue references and the associated move support
- Support for the UTF-16 encoding unit, and UTF-32 encoding unit Unicode character types
- Variadic templates (coupled with Rvalue references to allow for perfect forwarding)
- Compile-time constant expressions
- `decltype`
- `explicit` conversion operators
- Functions declared defaulted or deleted

Further, much time has passed since the prior C++ standard. Much code using the standard library has been written. This has revealed parts of the standard libraries that could use some improving. Among the many areas of improvement considered were standard library allocators. A new scope-based model of allocators was included in C++11 to supplement the prior model.

### Threading facilities

While the C++03 language provides a memory model that supports threading, the primary support for actually using threading comes with the C++11 standard library.

A thread class (`std::thread`) is provided, which takes a function object (and an optional series of arguments to pass to it) to run in the new thread. It is possible to cause a thread to halt until another executing thread completes, providing thread joining support via the `std::thread::join()` member function. Access is provided, where feasible, to the underlying native thread object(s) for platform-specific operations by the `std::thread::native_handle()` member function.

For synchronization between threads, appropriate mutexes (`std::mutex`, `std::recursive_mutex`, etc.) and condition variables (`std::condition_variable` and `std::condition_variable_any`) are added to the library. These are accessible via Resource Acquisition Is Initialization (RAII) locks (`std::lock_guard` and `std::unique_lock`) and locking algorithms for easy use.

For high-performance, low-level work, communicating between threads is sometimes needed without the overhead of mutexes. This is done using atomic operations on memory locations. These can optionally specify the minimum memory visibility constraints needed for an operation. Explicit memory barriers may also be used for this purpose.

The C++11 thread library also includes futures and promises for passing asynchronous results between threads, and `std::packaged_task` for wrapping up a function call that can generate such an asynchronous result. The futures proposal was criticized because it lacks a way to combine futures and check for the completion of one promise inside a set of promises.

Further high-level threading facilities such as thread pools have been remanded to a future C++ technical report. They are not part of C++11, but their eventual implementation is expected to be built entirely on top of the thread library features.

The new `std::async` facility provides a convenient method of running tasks and tying them to a `std::future`. The user can choose whether the task is to be run asynchronously on a separate thread or synchronously on a thread that waits for the value. By default, the implementation can choose, which provides an easy way to take advantage of hardware concurrency without oversubscription, and provides some of the advantages of a thread pool for simple usages.

### Tuple types

Tuples are collections composed of heterogeneous objects of pre-arranged dimensions. A tuple can be considered a generalization of a struct's member variables.

The C++11 version of the TR1 tuple type benefited from C++11 features like variadic templates. To implement reasonably, the TR1 version required an implementation-defined maximum number of contained types, and substantial macro trickery. By contrast, the implementation of the C++11 version requires no explicit implementation-defined maximum number of types. Though compilers will have an internal maximum recursion depth for template instantiation (which is normal), the C++11 version of tuples will not expose this value to the user.

Using variadic templates, the declaration of the tuple class looks as follows:

```mw
namespace std {
    template <class... Ts> 
    class tuple;
}
```

An example of definition and use of the tuple type:

```mw
using Types = std::tuple<int, double, long&, const char*>;
long lengthy = 12;
Types proof(18, 6.5, lengthy, "Ciao!");

lengthy = std::get<0>(proof); // Assign to 'lengthy' the value 18.
std::get<3>(proof) = " Beautiful!"; // Modify the tuple’s fourth element.
```

It's possible to create the tuple `proof` without defining its contents, but only if the tuple elements' types possess default constructors. Moreover, it's possible to assign a tuple to another tuple: if the two tuples’ types are the same, each element type must possess a copy constructor; otherwise, each element type of the right-side tuple must be convertible to that of the corresponding element type of the left-side tuple or that the corresponding element type of the left-side tuple has a suitable constructor.

```mw
using std::string;
using T1 = std::tuple<int, double, string>;
using T2 = std::tuple<char, short, const char*>;

T1 t1;
T2 t2('X', 2, "Hola!");
t1 = t2; // Ok, first two elements can be converted,
         // the third one can be constructed from a 'const char *'.
```

Just like `std::make_pair` for `std::pair`, there exists `std::make_tuple` to automatically create `std::tuple`s using type deduction and `auto` helps to declare such a tuple. `std::tie` creates tuples of lvalue references to help unpack tuples. `std::ignore` also helps here. See the example:

```mw
#include <string>
#include <tuple>

using std::string;

auto record = std::make_tuple("Hari Ram", "New Delhi", 3.5, 'A');
string name;
float gpa; 
char grade;
std::tie(name, std::ignore, gpa, grade) = record ; // std::ignore helps drop the place name
std::cout << name << ' ' << gpa << ' ' << grade << std::endl ;
```

Relational operators are available (among tuples with the same number of elements), and two expressions are available to check a tuple's characteristics (only during compilation):

- `std::tuple_size<T>::value` returns the number of elements in the tuple `T`,
- `std::tuple_element<I, T>::type` returns the type of the object number `I` of the tuple `T`.

### Hash tables

Including hash tables (unordered associative containers) in the C++ standard library is one of the most recurring requests. It was not adopted in C++03 due to time constraints only. Although hash tables are less efficient than a balanced tree in the worst case (in the presence of many collisions), they perform better in many real applications.

Collisions are managed only via *linear chaining* because the committee didn't consider it to be opportune to standardize solutions of *open addressing* that introduce quite a lot of intrinsic problems (above all when erasure of elements is admitted). To avoid name clashes with non-standard libraries that developed their own hash table implementations, the prefix “unordered” was used instead of “hash”.

The new library has four types of hash tables, differentiated by whether or not they accept elements with the same key (unique keys or equivalent keys), and whether they map each key to an associated value. They correspond to the four existing binary search tree based associative containers, with an unordered_ prefix.

| Type of hash table | Associated values | Equivalent keys |
|---|---|---|
| `std::unordered_set` | No | No |
| `std::unordered_multiset` | No | Yes |
| `std::unordered_map` | Yes | No |
| `std::unordered_multimap` | Yes | Yes |

The new classes fulfill all the requirements of a container class, and have all the methods needed to access elements: `insert`, `erase`, `begin`, `end`.

This new feature didn't need any C++ language core extensions (though implementations will take advantage of various C++11 language features), only a small extension of the header `<functional>` and the introduction of headers `<unordered_set>` and `<unordered_map>`. No other changes to any existing standard classes were needed, and it doesn't depend on any other extensions of the standard library.

### std::array and std::forward_list

In addition to the hash tables two more containers were added to the standard library. The `std::array` is a fixed-size container that is more efficient than `std::vector` but safer and easier to use than a C-style array. The `std::forward_list` is a singly-linked list that provides more space efficient storage than the double linked `std::list` when bidirectional iteration is not needed.

### Regular expressions

The new library, defined in the new header `<regex>`, is made of a couple of new classes:

- regular expressions are represented by instance of the template class `std::regex`;
- occurrences are represented by instance of the template class `std::match_results`,
- `std::regex_iterator` is used to iterate over all matches of a regex (with `std::cregex_iterator` for `const char*` and `std::sregex_iterator` for `std::string`)

The function `std::regex_search` is used for searching, while for ‘search and replace’ the function `std::regex_replace` is used which returns a new string.

Here is an example of the use of `std::regex_iterator`:

```mw
#include <regex>

using std::regex;
using std::sregex_iterator;
using std::string;

string pattern = R"([^ ,.\t\n]+)"; // find words separated by space, comma, period tab newline
string target = "Unseen University - Ankh-Morpork";

regex re(pattern); // throws exception on invalid pattern

// Use a regex_iterator to identify all words of 'target' separated by characters of 'pattern'.
for (sregex_iterator it(target.begin(), target.end(), re); it != re.end(); ++it) {
    string s = it->str();
    std::cout << s << std::endl;
}
```

The library `<regex>` requires neither alteration of any existing header (though it will use them where appropriate) nor an extension of the core language. In POSIX C, regular expressions are also available via the <regex.h>.

### General-purpose smart pointers

C++11 provides `std::unique_ptr`, and improvements to `std::shared_ptr` and `std::weak_ptr` from TR1. `std::auto_ptr` is deprecated.

### Extensible random number facility

The C standard library provides the ability to generate pseudorandom numbers via the function `rand`. However, the algorithm is delegated entirely to the library vendor. C++ inherited this functionality with no changes, but C++11 provides a new method for generating pseudorandom numbers.

C++11's random number functionality is split into two parts: a generator engine that contains the random number generator's state and produces the pseudorandom numbers; and a distribution, which determines the range and mathematical distribution of the outcome. These two are combined to form a random number generator object.

Unlike the C standard `rand`, the C++11 mechanism will come with three base generator engine algorithms:

- `linear_congruential_engine`,
- `subtract_with_carry_engine`, and
- `mersenne_twister_engine`.

C++11 also provides a number of standard distributions:

- `uniform_int_distribution`,
- `uniform_real_distribution`,
- `bernoulli_distribution`,
- `binomial_distribution`,
- `geometric_distribution`,
- `negative_binomial_distribution`,
- `poisson_distribution`,
- `exponential_distribution`,
- `gamma_distribution`,
- `weibull_distribution`,
- `extreme_value_distribution`,
- `normal_distribution`,
- `lognormal_distribution`,
- `chi_squared_distribution`,
- `cauchy_distribution`,
- `fisher_f_distribution`,
- `student_t_distribution`,
- `discrete_distribution`,
- `piecewise_constant_distribution` and
- `piecewise_linear_distribution`.

The generator and distributions are combined as in this example:

```mw
#include <functional>
#include <random>

using std::mt19937;
using std::uniform_int_distribution;

uniform_int_distribution<int> distribution(0, 99);
mt19937 engine; // Mersenne twister MT19937
auto generator = std::bind(distribution, engine);
int random = generator(); // Generate a uniform integral variate between 0 and 99.
int random2 = distribution(engine); // Generate another sample directly using the distribution and the engine objects.
```

### Wrapper reference

A wrapper reference is obtained from an instance of the class template `reference_wrapper`. Wrapper references are similar to normal references (‘`&`’) of the C++ language. To obtain a wrapper reference from any object the function template `ref` is used (for a constant reference `cref` is used).

Wrapper references are useful above all for function templates, where references to parameters rather than copies are needed:

```mw
#include <functional>
#include <iostream>

// This function will take a reference to the parameter 'r' and increment it.
void func(int& r) { 
    r++; 
}

// Template function.
template <class F, class P> 
void g(F f, P t) { 
    f(t); 
}

int main() {
    int i = 0;
    g(func, i); 
    // 'g<void(int& r), int>' is instantiated
    // then 'i' will not be modified.

    std::cout << i << std::endl; // Output -> 0

    g(func, std::ref(i)); 
    // 'g<void(int& r), reference_wrapper<int>>' is instantiated
    // then 'i' will be modified.
    std::cout << i << std::endl; // Output -> 1
}
```

This new utility was added to the existing `<functional>` header and didn't need further extensions of the C++ language.

### Polymorphic wrappers for function objects

Polymorphic wrappers for function objects are similar to function pointers in semantics and syntax, but are less tightly bound and can indiscriminately refer to anything which can be called (function pointers, member function pointers, or functors) whose arguments are compatible with those of the wrapper.

An example can clarify its characteristics:

```mw
#include <functional>

using std::function;
using std::plus;

// Wrapper creation using template class 'function'.
function<int(int, int)> func;

plus<int> add; 
// 'plus' is declared as 'template <class T> T plus(T, T) ;'
// then 'add' is type 'int add( int x, int y )'.

func = add; // OK - Parameters and return types are the same.

int a = func(1, 2);
// NOTE: if the wrapper 'func' does not refer to any function,
// the exception 'std::bad_function_call' is thrown.

function<bool(short, short)> func2;
if (!func2) {
    // True because 'func2' has not yet been assigned a function.

    bool adjacent(long x, long y);
    func2 = &adjacent; // OK - Parameters and return types are convertible.

    struct Test {
        bool operator()(short x, short y);
    };

    Test car;
    // 'std::ref' is a template function that returns the wrapper
    // of member function 'operator()' of struct 'car'.
    func = std::ref(car);
}
func = func2; // OK - Parameters and return types are convertible.
```

The template class `function` was defined inside the header `<functional>`, without needing any change to the C++ language.

### Type traits for metaprogramming

Metaprogramming consists of creating a program that creates or modifies another program (or itself). This can happen during compilation or during execution. The C++ Standards Committee has decided to introduce a library for metaprogramming during compiling via templates.

Here is an example of a meta-program using the C++03 standard: a recursion of template instances for calculating integer exponents:

```mw
template <int B, int N>
struct Power {
    // recursive call and recombination.
    enum { 
        VALUE = B * Power<B, N - 1>::VALUE 
    };
};

template <int B>
struct Power<B, 0> {
    // ''N == 0'' condition of termination.
    enum { 
        VALUE = 1 
    };
};

int quartic_of_three = Power<3, 4>::VALUE;
```

Many algorithms can operate on different types of data; C++'s templates support generic programming and make code more compact and useful. Nevertheless, it is common for algorithms to need information on the data types being used. This information can be extracted during instantiation of a template class using *type traits*.

*Type traits* can identify the category of an object and all the characteristics of a class (or of a struct). They are defined in the new header `<type_traits>`.

In the next example there is the template function 'elaborate' which, depending on the given data types, will instantiate one of the two proposed algorithms (`Algorithm::perform`).

```mw
#include <type_traits>

using std::is_floating_point;
using std::is_integral;

// First way of operating.
template <bool B> 
struct Algorithm {
    template <class T1, class T2> 
    static int perform(T1&, T2&) {
        // ...
    }
};

// Second way of operating.
template <> 
struct Algorithm<true> {
    template <class T1, class T2> 
    static int perform(T1, T2) {
        // ...
    }
};

// Instantiating 'elaborate' will automatically instantiate the correct way to operate.
template <class T1, class T2>
int elaborate(T1 A, T2 B) {
    // Use the second way only if 'T1' is an integer and if 'T2' is
    // in floating point, otherwise use the first way.
    return Algorithm<is_integral<T1>::value && is_floating_point<T2>::value>::perform( A, B ) ;
}
```

Via *type traits*, defined in header `<type_traits>`, it's also possible to create type transformation operations (`static_cast` and `const_cast` are insufficient inside a template).

This type of programming produces elegant and concise code; however, the weak point of these techniques is the debugging: it's uncomfortable during compilation and very difficult during program execution.

### Uniform method for computing the return type of function objects

Determining the return type of a template function object at compile-time is not intuitive, particularly if the return value depends on the parameters of the function. As an example:

```mw
struct Clear {
    // The parameter type is equal to the return type.
    int operator()(int) const;
    double operator()(double) const;
};

template <class Obj>
class Calculus {
private:
    Obj member;
public:
    template <class Arg> 
    Arg operator()(Arg& a) const {
        return member(a);
    }
};
```

Instantiating the class template `Calculus<Clear>`, the function object of `calculus` will have always the same return type as the function object of `Clear`. However, given class `Confused` below:

```mw
struct Confused {
    // The parameter type is not equal to the return type.
    double operator()(int) const;
    int operator()(double) const;
};
```

Attempting to instantiate `Calculus<Confused>` will cause the return type of `Calculus` to not be the same as that of class `Confused`. The compiler may generate warnings about the conversion from `int` to `double` and vice versa.

TR1 introduces, and C++11 adopts, the template class `std::result_of` that allows one to determine and use the return type of a function object for every declaration. The object `CalculusVer2` uses the `std::result_of` object to derive the return type of the function object:

```mw
#include <type_traits>

using std::result_of;

template <class Obj>
class CalculusVer2 {
private:
    Obj member;
public:
    template <class Arg>
    typename result_of<Obj(Arg)>::type operator()(Arg& a) const {
        return member(a);
    }
};
```

In this way in instances of function object of `CalculusVer2<Confused>` there are no conversions, warnings, or errors.

The only change from the TR1 version of `std::result_of` is that the TR1 version allowed an implementation to fail to be able to determine the result type of a function call. Due to changes to C++ for supporting `decltype`, the C++11 version of `std::result_of` no longer needs these special cases; implementations are required to compute a type in all cases.


## Improved C compatibility

For compatibility with C, from C99, these were added:

- Preprocessor:
  - variadic macros,
  - concatenation of adjacent narrow/wide string literals,
  - `_Pragma()` – equivalent of `#pragma`.
- `long long` – integer type that is at least 64 bits long.
- `__func__` – macro evaluating to the name of the function it is in.
- Headers:
  - `cstdbool` (`stdbool.h`),
  - `cstdint` (`stdint.h`),
  - `cinttypes` (`inttypes.h`).


## Features originally planned but removed or not included

Heading for a separate TR:

- Modules
- Decimal types
- Math special functions

Postponed:

- Concepts
- More complete or required garbage collection support
- Reflection
- Macro scopes


## Features removed or deprecated

The term sequence point was removed, being replaced by specifying that either one operation is sequenced before another, or that two operations are unsequenced.

The use of the keyword `export`, along with exported templates, were removed. The `export` keyword remained reserved, and was later reintroduced in C++20 with the addition of modules.

Dynamic exception specifications are deprecated. Compile-time specification of non-exception-throwing functions is available with the `noexcept` keyword, which is useful for optimization.

`std::auto_ptr` is deprecated, having been superseded by `std::unique_ptr`.

Function object base classes (`std::unary_function`, `std::binary_function`), adapters to pointers to functions and adapters to pointers to members, and binder classes are all deprecated.

Annex D.2 states: "The use of the `register` keyword as a storage-class-specifier (§7.1.1) is deprecated."
