---
title: "C++11 (part 2/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11
domain: catch2-cpp-lib
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: catch2 testing, cpp test framework, catch2 header only, catch2 test cases
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/4
---

## Extensions to the C++ core language

One function of the C++ committee is the development of the language core. Areas of the core language that were significantly improved include multithreading support, generic programming support, uniform initialization, and performance.

### Core language runtime performance enhancements

These language features primarily exist to provide some kind of runtime performance benefit, either of memory or of computing speed.

#### Rvalue references and move constructors

In C++03 (and before), temporaries (termed "rvalues", as they often lie on the right side of an assignment) were intended to never be modifiable — just as in C — and were considered to be indistinguishable from `const T&` types; nevertheless, in some cases, temporaries could have been modified, a behavior that was even considered to be a useful loophole. C++11 adds a new non-const reference type called an rvalue reference, identified by `T&&`. This refers to temporaries that are permitted to be modified after they are initialized, for the purpose of allowing "move semantics".

A chronic performance problem with C++03 is the costly and unneeded deep copies that can happen implicitly when objects are passed by value. To illustrate the issue, consider that an `std::vector<T>` is, internally, a wrapper around a C-style array with a defined size. If an `std::vector<T>` temporary is created or returned from a function, it can be stored only by creating a new `std::vector<T>` and copying all the rvalue's data into it. Then the temporary and all its memory is destroyed. (For simplicity, this discussion neglects the return value optimization.)

In C++11, a move constructor of `std::vector<T>` that takes an rvalue reference to an `std::vector<T>` can copy the pointer to the internal C-style array out of the rvalue into the new `std::vector<T>`, then set the pointer inside the rvalue to null. Since the temporary will never again be used, no code will try to access the null pointer, and because the pointer is null, its memory is not deleted when it goes out of scope. Hence, the operation not only forgoes the expense of a deep copy, but is safe and invisible.

Rvalue references can provide performance benefits to existing code without needing to make any changes outside the standard library. The type of the returned value of a function returning an `std::vector<T>` temporary does not need to be changed explicitly to `std::vector<T>&&` to invoke the move constructor, as temporaries are considered rvalues automatically. (However, if `std::vector<T>` is a C++03 version without a move constructor, then the copy constructor will be invoked with a `const std::vector<T>`, incurring a significant memory allocation.)

For safety reasons, some restrictions are imposed. A named variable will never be considered to be an rvalue even if it is declared as such. To get an rvalue, the function template `std::move()` should be used. Rvalue references can also be modified only under certain circumstances, being intended to be used primarily with move constructors.

Due to the nature of the wording of rvalue references, and to some modification to the wording for lvalue references (regular references), rvalue references allow developers to provide perfect function forwarding. When combined with variadic templates, this ability allows for function templates that can perfectly forward arguments to another function that takes those particular arguments. This is most useful for forwarding constructor parameters, to create factory functions that will automatically call the correct constructor for those particular arguments. This is seen in the emplace_back set of the C++ standard library methods.

#### constexpr – Generalized constant expressions

C++ has always had the concept of constant expressions. These are expressions such as `3 + 4` that will always yield the same results, at compile time and at runtime. Constant expressions are optimization opportunities for compilers, and compilers frequently execute them at compile time and hardcode the results in the program. Also, in several places, the C++ specification requires using constant expressions. Defining an array requires a constant expression, and enumerator values must be constant expressions.

However, a constant expression has never been allowed to contain a function call or object constructor. So a piece of code as simple as this is invalid:

```mw
int getFive() {
    return 5;
}

int someValue[getFive() + 7]; // Create an array of 12 integers. Ill-formed C++
```

This was not valid in C++03, because `getFive() + 7` is not a constant expression. A C++03 compiler has no way of knowing if `getFive()` actually is constant at runtime. In theory, this function could affect a global variable, call other non-runtime constant functions, etc.

C++11 introduced the keyword `constexpr`, which allows the user to guarantee that a function or object constructor is a compile-time constant. The above example can be rewritten as follows:

```mw
constexpr int getFive() {
    return 5;
}

int someValue[getFive() + 7]; // Create an array of 12 integers. Valid C++11
```

This allows the compiler to understand, and verify, that `getFive()` is a compile-time constant.

Using `constexpr` on a function imposes some limits on what that function can do. First, the function must have a non-void return type. Second, the function body cannot declare variables or define new types. Third, the body may contain only declarations, null statements and a single return statement. There must exist argument values such that, after argument substitution, the expression in the return statement produces a constant expression.

Before C++11, the values of variables could be used in constant expressions only if the variables are declared const, have an initializer which is a constant expression, and are of integral or enumeration type. C++11 removes the restriction that the variables must be of integral or enumeration type if they are defined with the `constexpr` keyword:

```mw
constexpr double EARTH_GRAVITATIONAL_ACCELERATION = 9.8;
constexpr double MOON_GRAVITATIONAL_ACCELERATION = EARTH_GRAVITATIONAL_ACCELERATION / 6.0;
```

Such data variables are implicitly const, and must have an initializer which must be a constant expression.

To construct constant expression data values from user-defined types, constructors can also be declared with `constexpr`. A `constexpr` constructor's function body can contain only declarations and null statements, and cannot declare variables or define types, as with a `constexpr` function. There must exist argument values such that, after argument substitution, it initializes the class's members with constant expressions. The destructors for such types must be trivial.

The copy constructor for a type with any `constexpr` constructors should usually also be defined as a `constexpr` constructor, to allow objects of the type to be returned by value from a constexpr function. Any member function of a class, such as copy constructors, operator overloads, etc., can be declared as `constexpr`, so long as they meet the requirements for constexpr functions. This allows the compiler to copy objects at compile time, perform operations on them, etc.

If a constexpr function or constructor is called with arguments which aren't constant expressions, the call behaves as if the function were not constexpr, and the resulting value is not a constant expression. Likewise, if the expression in the return statement of a constexpr function does not evaluate to a constant expression for a given invocation, the result is not a constant expression.

`constexpr` differs from `consteval`, introduced in C++20, in that the latter must always produce a compile time constant, while `constexpr` does not have this restriction.

#### Modification to the definition of plain old data

In C++03, a class or struct must follow a number of rules for it to be considered a plain old data (POD) type. Types that fit this definition produce object layouts that are compatible with C, and they could also be initialized statically. The C++03 standard has restrictions on what types are compatible with C or can be statically initialized despite there being no technical reason a compiler couldn't accept the program; if someone were to create a C++03 POD type and add a virtual member function, this type would no longer be a POD type, could not be statically initialized, and would be incompatible with C despite no change to the memory layout.

C++11 relaxed several of the POD rules, by dividing the POD concept into two separate concepts: *trivial* and *standard-layout*.

A type that is *trivial* can be statically initialized. It also means that it is valid to copy data around via `std::memcpy()`, rather than having to use a copy constructor. The lifetime of a *trivial* type begins when its storage is defined, not when a constructor completes.

A trivial class or struct is defined as one that:

1. Has a trivial default constructor. This may use the default constructor syntax (`X() = default;`).
2. Has trivial copy and move constructors, which may use the default syntax.
3. Has trivial copy and move assignment operators, which may use the default syntax.
4. Has a trivial destructor, which must not be virtual.

Constructors are trivial only if there are no virtual member functions of the class and no virtual base classes. Copy/move operations also require all non-static data members to be trivial.

A type that is *standard-layout* means that it orders and packs its members in a way that is compatible with C. A class or struct is standard-layout, by definition, provided:

1. It has no virtual functions
2. It has no virtual base classes
3. All its non-static data members have the same access control (public, private, protected)
4. All its non-static data members, including any in its base classes, are in the same one class in the hierarchy
5. The above rules also apply to all the base classes and to all non-static data members in the class hierarchy
6. It has no base classes of the same type as the first defined non-static data member

A class/struct/union is considered POD if it is trivial, standard-layout, and all of its non-static data members and base classes are PODs.

By separating these concepts, it becomes possible to give up one without losing the other. A class with complex move and copy constructors may not be trivial, but it could be standard-layout and thus interoperate with C. Similarly, a class with public and private non-static data members would not be standard-layout, but it could be trivial and thus `memcpy`-able.

### Core language build-time performance enhancements

#### Extern template

In C++03, the compiler must instantiate a template whenever a fully specified template is encountered in a translation unit. If the template is instantiated with the same types in many translation units, this can dramatically increase compile times. There is no way to prevent this in C++03, so C++11 introduced extern template declarations, analogous to extern data declarations.

C++03 has this syntax to oblige the compiler to instantiate a template:

```mw
template class std::vector<X>;
```

C++11 now provides this syntax:

```mw
extern template class std::vector<X>;
```

which tells the compiler *not* to instantiate the template in this translation unit.

### Core language usability enhancements

These features exist for the primary purpose of making the language easier to use. These can improve type safety, minimize code repetition, make erroneous code less likely, etc.

#### Initializer lists

C++03 inherited the initializer-list feature from C. A struct or array is given a list of arguments in braces, in the order of the members' definitions in the struct. These initializer-lists are recursive, so an array of structs or struct containing other structs can use them.

```mw
struct FloatAndInt {
    float first;
    int second;
};

FloatAndInt scalar = {0.43f, 10}; // One Object, with first=0.43f and second=10
FloatAndInt a[] = {{13.4f, 3}, {43.28f, 29}, {5.934f, 17}}; // An array of three Objects
```

This is very useful for static lists, or initializing a struct to some value. C++ also provides constructors to initialize an object, but they are often not as convenient as the initializer list. However, C++03 allows initializer-lists only on structs and classes that conform to the Plain Old Data (POD) definition; C++11 extends initializer-lists, so they can be used for all classes including standard containers like `std::vector<T>`.

C++11 binds the concept to a template, called `std::initializer_list<T>`. This allows constructors and other functions to take initializer-lists as parameters. For example:

```mw
using std::initializer_list;

class MySequence {
public:
    MySequence(initializer_list<int> list);
};
```

This allows `MySequence` to be constructed from a sequence of integers, such as:

```mw
MySequence s = {1, 4, 5, 6};
```

This constructor is a special kind of constructor, called an initializer-list-constructor. Classes with such a constructor are treated specially during uniform initialization (see below)

The template class `std::initializer_list<T>` is a first-class C++11 standard library type. They can be constructed statically by the C++11 compiler via use of the `{}` syntax without a type name in contexts where such braces will deduce to an `std::initializer_list<T>`, or by explicitly specifying the type like `std::initializer_list<T>{args}` (and so on for other varieties of construction syntax).

The list can be copied once constructed, which is cheap and will act as a copy-by-reference (the class is typically implemented as a pair of begin/end pointers). An `std::initializer_list<T>` is constant: its members cannot be changed once it is created, and nor can the data in those members be changed (which rules out moving from them, requiring copies into class members, etc.).

Although its construction is specially treated by the compiler, an `std::initializer_list<T>` is a real type, and so it can be used in other places besides class constructors. Regular functions can take typed `std::initializer_list<T>`s as arguments. For example:

```mw
using std::initializer_list;

void foo(initializer_list<float> list); // Copying is cheap; see above

foo({1.0f, -3.45f, -0.4f});
```

Examples of this in the standard library include the `std::min()` and `std::max()` templates taking `std::initializer_list<T>`s of numeric type.

Standard containers can also be initialized in these ways:

```mw
using std::string;
using std::vector;

vector<string> v = { "xyzzy", "plugh", "abracadabra" };
vector<string> v({ "xyzzy", "plugh", "abracadabra" });
vector<string> v{ "xyzzy", "plugh", "abracadabra" }; // see "Uniform initialization" below
```

#### Uniform initialization

C++03 has a number of problems with initializing types. Several ways to do this exist, and some produce different results when interchanged. The traditional constructor syntax, for example, can look like a function declaration, and steps must be taken to ensure that the compiler's most vexing parse rule will not mistake it for such. Only aggregates and POD types can be initialized with aggregate initializers (using `T x = { /* initialization */ };`).

C++11 provides a syntax that allows for fully uniform type initialization that works on any object. It expands on the initializer list syntax:

```mw
struct IntAndFloat1 {
    int x;
    double y;
};

struct IntAndFloat2 {
private:
    int x;
    double y;
public:
    IntAndFloat2(int x, double y): 
        x{x}, y{y} {}
};

IntAndFloat1 v1{5, 3.2};
IntAndFloat2 v2{2, 4.3};
```

The initialization of `v1` behaves exactly as though it were aggregate-initialization. That is, each data member of an object, in turn, will be copy-initialized with the corresponding value from the initializer-list. Implicit type conversion will be used where needed. If no conversion exists, or only a narrowing conversion exists, the program is ill-formed. The initialization of `v2` invokes the constructor.

One can also do this:

```mw
using std::string;

struct IdString {
    string name;
    int identifier;
};

IdString getString() {
    return {"foo", 42}; // Note the lack of explicit type.
}
```

Uniform initialization does not replace constructor syntax, which is still needed at times. If a class has an initializer list constructor (`T(initializer_list<X> v);`), then it takes priority over other forms of construction, provided that the initializer list conforms to the sequence constructor's type. The C++11 version of `std::vector<T>` has an initializer list constructor for its template type. Thus this code:

```mw
std::vector<int> vec{4};
```

will call the initializer list constructor, not the constructor of `std::vector` that takes a single size parameter and creates the vector with that size. To access the latter constructor, the user will need to use the standard constructor syntax directly.

#### Type inference

In C++03 (and C), to use a variable, its type must be specified explicitly. However, with the advent of template types and template metaprogramming techniques, the type of something, particularly the well-defined return value of a function, may not be easily expressed. Thus, storing intermediates in variables is difficult, possibly needing knowledge of the internals of a given metaprogramming library.

C++11 allows this to be mitigated in two ways. First, the definition of a variable with an explicit initialization can use the `auto` keyword. This creates a variable of the specific type of the initializer:

```mw
using namespace std::placeholders;

auto callable = std::bind(&foo, _2, _1, x);
auto y = 5;
```

The type of `callable` is simply whatever the particular template function override of `std::bind()` returns for those particular arguments. This type is easily determined procedurally by the compiler as part of its semantic analysis duties, but is not easy for the user to determine upon inspection. The type of `y` is also well-defined, but it is easier for the user to determine. It is an `int`, which is the same type as the integer literal.

This use of the keyword `auto` in C++ re-purposes the semantics of this keyword, which was originally used in the typeless predecessor language B in a related role of denoting an untyped automatic variable definition.

Further, the keyword `decltype` can be used to determine the type of expression at compile-time. For example:

```mw
int i = 0;
decltype(i) j = 5;
```

This is more useful in conjunction with `auto`, since the type of auto variable is known only to the compiler. However, `decltype` can also be very useful for expressions in code that makes heavy use of operator overloading and specialized types.

`auto` is also useful for reducing the verbosity of the code. For instance, instead of writing

```mw
using std::vector;

for (vector<int>::const_iterator it = v.cbegin(); it != v.cend(); ++it) { /* loop */ }
```

the programmer can use the shorter

```mw
for (auto it = v.cbegin(); it != v.cend(); ++it) { /* loop */ }
```

which can be further compacted since `v` implements `begin()`/`end()` iterators:

```mw
for (const auto& x : v) { /* loop */ }
```

This difference grows as the programmer begins to nest containers, though in such cases `typedef`s may be used to decrease the amount of code.

The type denoted by `decltype` can be different from the type deduced by `auto`.

```mw
#include <vector>

using std::vector;

int main() {
    const vector<int> v(1);
    auto a = v[0];        // a has type int
    decltype(v[0]) b = 1; // b has type const int&, the return type of
                          //   std::vector<int>::operator[](size_type) const
    auto c = 0;           // c has type int
    auto d = c;           // d has type int
    decltype(c) e;        // e has type int, the type of the entity named by c
    decltype((c)) f = c;  // f has type int&, because (c) is an lvalue
    decltype(0) g;        // g has type int, because 0 is an rvalue
}
```

#### Range-based for loop

C++11 extends the syntax of the `for` statement to allow for easy iteration over a range of elements:

```mw
int a[5] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
// double the value of each element in a:
for (int& x : a) {
    x *= 2;
}

// similar but also using type inference for array elements
for (auto& x : a) {
    x *= 2;
}
```

This form of `for`, called the “range-based for”, will iterate over each element in the list. It will work for C-style arrays (provided its length is known at compile time), initializer lists, and any type that has `begin()` and `end()` functions defined for it that return iterators. All standard library containers that have begin/end pairs will work with the range-based for statement.

#### Lambda functions and expressions

C++11 provides the ability to create anonymous functions, called lambda functions. These are defined as follows:

```mw
// Defines a lambda named add
// Takes two ints and returns an int
auto add = [](int x, int y) -> int { 
    return x + y; 
}
```

The return type (`-> int` in this example) can be omitted as long as all `return` expressions return the same type. A lambda can optionally be a closure.

#### Alternative function syntax

Standard C function declaration syntax was perfectly adequate for the feature set of the C language. As C++ evolved from C, it kept the basic syntax and extended it where needed. However, as C++ grew more complex, it exposed several limits, especially regarding template function declarations. For example, in C++03 this is invalid:

```mw
template <class L, class R>
Ret add(const L& lhs, const R& rhs) {
    return lhs + rhs; // Ret must be the type of lhs + rhs
}
```

The type `Ret` is whatever the addition of types `L` and `R` will produce. Even with the aforementioned C++11 functionality of `decltype`, this is not possible:

```mw
// Not valid C++11
template <class L, class R>
decltype(lhs + rhs) add(const L& lhs, const R& rhs) {
    return lhs + rhs;
}
```

This is not valid C++ because `lhs` and `rhs` have not yet been defined; they will not be valid identifiers until after the parser has parsed the rest of the function prototype.

To work around this, C++11 introduced a new function declaration syntax, with a *trailing-return-type*:

```mw
template <class L, class R>
auto add(const L& lhs, const R& rhs) -> decltype(lhs + rhs) {
    return lhs + rhs;
}
```

This syntax can be used for more mundane function declarations and definitions:

```mw
struct X {
    static auto add(int x, int y) -> int {
        return x + y;
    }
};
```

The use of the "`auto`" keyword in this case is just part of the syntax and does not perform automatic type deduction in C++11. However, starting with C++14, the trailing return type can be removed entirely and the compiler will deduce the return type automatically.

#### Object construction improvement

In C++03, constructors of a class are not allowed to call other constructors in an initializer list of that class. Each constructor must construct all of its class members itself or call a common member function, as follows:

```mw
class Integer {
private:
    int value;

    void setValue(int num) {
        value = num;
    }
public:
    Integer(int number) {
        setValue(number);
    }

    Integer() {
        setValue(42);
    }
};
```

Constructors for base classes cannot be directly exposed to derived classes; each derived class must implement constructors even if a base class constructor would be appropriate. Non-constant data members of classes cannot be initialized at the site of the declaration of those members. They can be initialized only in a constructor.

C++11 provides solutions to all of these problems.

C++11 allows constructors to call other peer constructors (termed delegation). This allows constructors to utilize another constructor's behavior with a minimum of added code. Delegation has been used in other languages e.g., Java and Objective-C.

This syntax is as follows:

```mw
class Integer {
private: 
    int value;
public:
    Integer(int number): 
        value(number) {}

    Integer(): 
        Integer(42) {}
};
```

In this case, the same effect could have been achieved by making `number` a default parameter. The new syntax, however, allows the default value (42) to be expressed in the implementation rather than the interface — a benefit to maintainers of library code since default values for function parameters are “baked in” to call sites, whereas constructor delegation allows the value to be changed without recompilation of the code using the library.

This comes with a caveat: C++03 considers an object to be constructed when its constructor finishes executing, but C++11 considers an object constructed once *any* constructor finishes execution. Since multiple constructors will be allowed to execute, this will mean that each delegating constructor will be executing on a fully constructed object of its own type. Derived class constructors will execute after all delegation in their base classes is complete.

For base-class constructors, C++11 allows a class to specify that base class constructors will be inherited. Thus, the C++11 compiler will generate code to perform the inheritance and the forwarding of the derived class to the base class. This is an all-or-nothing feature: either all of that base class's constructors are forwarded or none of them are. Also, an inherited constructor will be shadowed if it matches the signature of a constructor of the derived class, and restrictions exist for multiple inheritance: class constructors cannot be inherited from two classes that use constructors with the same signature.

The syntax is as follows:

```mw
class Base {
public:
    Base(int value);
};

class Derived : public Base {
public:
    using Base::Base;
};
```

For member initialization, C++11 allows this syntax:

```mw
class Integer {
private:
    int value = 5;
public:
    Integer() {}

    explicit Integer(int value): 
        value(value) {}
};
```

Any constructor of the class will initialize `value` with 5, if the constructor does not override the initialization with its own. So the above empty constructor will initialize `value` as the class definition states, but the constructor that takes an int will initialize it to the given parameter.

It can also use constructor or uniform initialization, instead of the assignment initialization shown above.

#### Explicit overrides and final

In C++03, it is possible to accidentally create a new virtual function, when one intended to override a base class function. For example:

```mw
struct Base {
    virtual void foo(float x);
};

struct Derived : public Base {
    virtual void foo(int x);
};
```

Suppose the `Derived::foo()` is intended to replace the base class version. But instead, because it has a different signature, it creates a second virtual function. This is a common problem, particularly when a user goes to modify the base class.

C++11 provides syntax to solve this problem.

```mw
struct Base {
    virtual void foo(float x);
};

struct Derived : public Base {
    virtual void foo(int x) override; // ill-formed - doesn't override a base class method
};
```

The `override` special identifier means that the compiler will check the base class(es) to see if there is a virtual function with this exact signature. And if there is not, the compiler will indicate an error.
