---
title: "RFC 9000: QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport (part 5/9)"
source: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000.html
domain: quic-protocol
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: quic protocol, quic transport, udp transport
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 5/9
---

## 13. Packetization and Reliability

A sender sends one or more frames in a QUIC packet; see Section 12.4.¶

A sender can minimize per-packet bandwidth and computational costs by including as many frames as possible in each QUIC packet. A sender MAY wait for a short period of time to collect multiple frames before sending a packet that is not maximally packed, to avoid sending out large numbers of small packets. An implementation MAY use knowledge about application sending behavior or heuristics to determine whether and for how long to wait. This waiting period is an implementation decision, and an implementation should be careful to delay conservatively, since any delay is likely to increase application-visible latency.¶

Stream multiplexing is achieved by interleaving STREAM frames from multiple streams into one or more QUIC packets. A single QUIC packet can include multiple STREAM frames from one or more streams.¶

One of the benefits of QUIC is avoidance of head-of-line blocking across multiple streams. When a packet loss occurs, only streams with data in that packet are blocked waiting for a retransmission to be received, while other streams can continue making progress. Note that when data from multiple streams is included in a single QUIC packet, loss of that packet blocks all those streams from making progress. Implementations are advised to include as few streams as necessary in outgoing packets without losing transmission efficiency to underfilled packets.¶

### 13.1. Packet Processing

A packet MUST NOT be acknowledged until packet protection has been successfully removed and all frames contained in the packet have been processed. For STREAM frames, this means the data has been enqueued in preparation to be received by the application protocol, but it does not require that data be delivered and consumed.¶

Once the packet has been fully processed, a receiver acknowledges receipt by sending one or more ACK frames containing the packet number of the received packet.¶

An endpoint SHOULD treat receipt of an acknowledgment for a packet it did not send as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION, if it is able to detect the condition. For further discussion of how this might be achieved, see Section 21.4.¶

### 13.2. Generating Acknowledgments

Endpoints acknowledge all packets they receive and process. However, only ack-eliciting packets cause an ACK frame to be sent within the maximum ack delay. Packets that are not ack-eliciting are only acknowledged when an ACK frame is sent for other reasons.¶

When sending a packet for any reason, an endpoint SHOULD attempt to include an ACK frame if one has not been sent recently. Doing so helps with timely loss detection at the peer.¶

In general, frequent feedback from a receiver improves loss and congestion response, but this has to be balanced against excessive load generated by a receiver that sends an ACK frame in response to every ack-eliciting packet. The guidance offered below seeks to strike this balance.¶

#### 13.2.1. Sending ACK Frames

Every packet SHOULD be acknowledged at least once, and ack-eliciting packets MUST be acknowledged at least once within the maximum delay an endpoint communicated using the max_ack_delay transport parameter; see Section 18.2. max_ack_delay declares an explicit contract: an endpoint promises to never intentionally delay acknowledgments of an ack-eliciting packet by more than the indicated value. If it does, any excess accrues to the RTT estimate and could result in spurious or delayed retransmissions from the peer. A sender uses the receiver's max_ack_delay value in determining timeouts for timer-based retransmission, as detailed in Section 6.2 of [QUIC-RECOVERY].¶

An endpoint MUST acknowledge all ack-eliciting Initial and Handshake packets immediately and all ack-eliciting 0-RTT and 1-RTT packets within its advertised max_ack_delay, with the following exception. Prior to handshake confirmation, an endpoint might not have packet protection keys for decrypting Handshake, 0-RTT, or 1-RTT packets when they are received. It might therefore buffer them and acknowledge them when the requisite keys become available.¶

Since packets containing only ACK frames are not congestion controlled, an endpoint MUST NOT send more than one such packet in response to receiving an ack-eliciting packet.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT send a non-ack-eliciting packet in response to a non-ack-eliciting packet, even if there are packet gaps that precede the received packet. This avoids an infinite feedback loop of acknowledgments, which could prevent the connection from ever becoming idle. Non-ack-eliciting packets are eventually acknowledged when the endpoint sends an ACK frame in response to other events.¶

An endpoint that is only sending ACK frames will not receive acknowledgments from its peer unless those acknowledgments are included in packets with ack-eliciting frames. An endpoint SHOULD send an ACK frame with other frames when there are new ack-eliciting packets to acknowledge. When only non-ack-eliciting packets need to be acknowledged, an endpoint MAY choose not to send an ACK frame with outgoing frames until an ack-eliciting packet has been received.¶

An endpoint that is only sending non-ack-eliciting packets might choose to occasionally add an ack-eliciting frame to those packets to ensure that it receives an acknowledgment; see Section 13.2.4. In that case, an endpoint MUST NOT send an ack-eliciting frame in all packets that would otherwise be non-ack-eliciting, to avoid an infinite feedback loop of acknowledgments.¶

In order to assist loss detection at the sender, an endpoint SHOULD generate and send an ACK frame without delay when it receives an ack-eliciting packet either:¶

- when the received packet has a packet number less than another ack-eliciting packet that has been received, or¶
- when the packet has a packet number larger than the highest-numbered ack-eliciting packet that has been received and there are missing packets between that packet and this packet.¶

Similarly, packets marked with the ECN Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint in the IP header SHOULD be acknowledged immediately, to reduce the peer's response time to congestion events.¶

The algorithms in [QUIC-RECOVERY] are expected to be resilient to receivers that do not follow the guidance offered above. However, an implementation should only deviate from these requirements after careful consideration of the performance implications of a change, for connections made by the endpoint and for other users of the network.¶

#### 13.2.2. Acknowledgment Frequency

A receiver determines how frequently to send acknowledgments in response to ack-eliciting packets. This determination involves a trade-off.¶

Endpoints rely on timely acknowledgment to detect loss; see Section 6 of [QUIC-RECOVERY]. Window-based congestion controllers, such as the one described in Section 7 of [QUIC-RECOVERY], rely on acknowledgments to manage their congestion window. In both cases, delaying acknowledgments can adversely affect performance.¶

On the other hand, reducing the frequency of packets that carry only acknowledgments reduces packet transmission and processing cost at both endpoints. It can improve connection throughput on severely asymmetric links and reduce the volume of acknowledgment traffic using return path capacity; see Section 3 of [RFC3449].¶

A receiver SHOULD send an ACK frame after receiving at least two ack-eliciting packets. This recommendation is general in nature and consistent with recommendations for TCP endpoint behavior [RFC5681]. Knowledge of network conditions, knowledge of the peer's congestion controller, or further research and experimentation might suggest alternative acknowledgment strategies with better performance characteristics.¶

A receiver MAY process multiple available packets before determining whether to send an ACK frame in response.¶

#### 13.2.3. Managing ACK Ranges

When an ACK frame is sent, one or more ranges of acknowledged packets are included. Including acknowledgments for older packets reduces the chance of spurious retransmissions caused by losing previously sent ACK frames, at the cost of larger ACK frames.¶

ACK frames SHOULD always acknowledge the most recently received packets, and the more out of order the packets are, the more important it is to send an updated ACK frame quickly, to prevent the peer from declaring a packet as lost and spuriously retransmitting the frames it contains. An ACK frame is expected to fit within a single QUIC packet. If it does not, then older ranges (those with the smallest packet numbers) are omitted.¶

A receiver limits the number of ACK Ranges (Section 19.3.1) it remembers and sends in ACK frames, both to limit the size of ACK frames and to avoid resource exhaustion. After receiving acknowledgments for an ACK frame, the receiver SHOULD stop tracking those acknowledged ACK Ranges. Senders can expect acknowledgments for most packets, but QUIC does not guarantee receipt of an acknowledgment for every packet that the receiver processes.¶

It is possible that retaining many ACK Ranges could cause an ACK frame to become too large. A receiver can discard unacknowledged ACK Ranges to limit ACK frame size, at the cost of increased retransmissions from the sender. This is necessary if an ACK frame would be too large to fit in a packet. Receivers MAY also limit ACK frame size further to preserve space for other frames or to limit the capacity that acknowledgments consume.¶

A receiver MUST retain an ACK Range unless it can ensure that it will not subsequently accept packets with numbers in that range. Maintaining a minimum packet number that increases as ranges are discarded is one way to achieve this with minimal state.¶

Receivers can discard all ACK Ranges, but they MUST retain the largest packet number that has been successfully processed, as that is used to recover packet numbers from subsequent packets; see Section 17.1.¶

A receiver SHOULD include an ACK Range containing the largest received packet number in every ACK frame. The Largest Acknowledged field is used in ECN validation at a sender, and including a lower value than what was included in a previous ACK frame could cause ECN to be unnecessarily disabled; see Section 13.4.2.¶

Section 13.2.4 describes an exemplary approach for determining what packets to acknowledge in each ACK frame. Though the goal of this algorithm is to generate an acknowledgment for every packet that is processed, it is still possible for acknowledgments to be lost.¶

#### 13.2.4. Limiting Ranges by Tracking ACK Frames

When a packet containing an ACK frame is sent, the Largest Acknowledged field in that frame can be saved. When a packet containing an ACK frame is acknowledged, the receiver can stop acknowledging packets less than or equal to the Largest Acknowledged field in the sent ACK frame.¶

A receiver that sends only non-ack-eliciting packets, such as ACK frames, might not receive an acknowledgment for a long period of time. This could cause the receiver to maintain state for a large number of ACK frames for a long period of time, and ACK frames it sends could be unnecessarily large. In such a case, a receiver could send a PING or other small ack-eliciting frame occasionally, such as once per round trip, to elicit an ACK from the peer.¶

In cases without ACK frame loss, this algorithm allows for a minimum of 1 RTT of reordering. In cases with ACK frame loss and reordering, this approach does not guarantee that every acknowledgment is seen by the sender before it is no longer included in the ACK frame. Packets could be received out of order, and all subsequent ACK frames containing them could be lost. In this case, the loss recovery algorithm could cause spurious retransmissions, but the sender will continue making forward progress.¶

#### 13.2.5. Measuring and Reporting Host Delay

An endpoint measures the delays intentionally introduced between the time the packet with the largest packet number is received and the time an acknowledgment is sent. The endpoint encodes this acknowledgment delay in the ACK Delay field of an ACK frame; see Section 19.3. This allows the receiver of the ACK frame to adjust for any intentional delays, which is important for getting a better estimate of the path RTT when acknowledgments are delayed.¶

A packet might be held in the OS kernel or elsewhere on the host before being processed. An endpoint MUST NOT include delays that it does not control when populating the ACK Delay field in an ACK frame. However, endpoints SHOULD include buffering delays caused by unavailability of decryption keys, since these delays can be large and are likely to be non-repeating.¶

When the measured acknowledgment delay is larger than its max_ack_delay, an endpoint SHOULD report the measured delay. This information is especially useful during the handshake when delays might be large; see Section 13.2.1.¶

#### 13.2.6. ACK Frames and Packet Protection

ACK frames MUST only be carried in a packet that has the same packet number space as the packet being acknowledged; see Section 12.1. For instance, packets that are protected with 1-RTT keys MUST be acknowledged in packets that are also protected with 1-RTT keys.¶

Packets that a client sends with 0-RTT packet protection MUST be acknowledged by the server in packets protected by 1-RTT keys. This can mean that the client is unable to use these acknowledgments if the server cryptographic handshake messages are delayed or lost. Note that the same limitation applies to other data sent by the server protected by the 1-RTT keys.¶

#### 13.2.7. PADDING Frames Consume Congestion Window

Packets containing PADDING frames are considered to be in flight for congestion control purposes [QUIC-RECOVERY]. Packets containing only PADDING frames therefore consume congestion window but do not generate acknowledgments that will open the congestion window. To avoid a deadlock, a sender SHOULD ensure that other frames are sent periodically in addition to PADDING frames to elicit acknowledgments from the receiver.¶

### 13.3. Retransmission of Information

QUIC packets that are determined to be lost are not retransmitted whole. The same applies to the frames that are contained within lost packets. Instead, the information that might be carried in frames is sent again in new frames as needed.¶

New frames and packets are used to carry information that is determined to have been lost. In general, information is sent again when a packet containing that information is determined to be lost, and sending ceases when a packet containing that information is acknowledged.¶

- Data sent in CRYPTO frames is retransmitted according to the rules in [QUIC-RECOVERY], until all data has been acknowledged. Data in CRYPTO frames for Initial and Handshake packets is discarded when keys for the corresponding packet number space are discarded.¶
- Application data sent in STREAM frames is retransmitted in new STREAM frames unless the endpoint has sent a RESET_STREAM for that stream. Once an endpoint sends a RESET_STREAM frame, no further STREAM frames are needed.¶
- ACK frames carry the most recent set of acknowledgments and the acknowledgment delay from the largest acknowledged packet, as described in Section 13.2.1. Delaying the transmission of packets containing ACK frames or resending old ACK frames can cause the peer to generate an inflated RTT sample or unnecessarily disable ECN.¶
- Cancellation of stream transmission, as carried in a RESET_STREAM frame, is sent until acknowledged or until all stream data is acknowledged by the peer (that is, either the "Reset Recvd" or "Data Recvd" state is reached on the sending part of the stream). The content of a RESET_STREAM frame MUST NOT change when it is sent again.¶
- Similarly, a request to cancel stream transmission, as encoded in a STOP_SENDING frame, is sent until the receiving part of the stream enters either a "Data Recvd" or "Reset Recvd" state; see Section 3.5.¶
- Connection close signals, including packets that contain CONNECTION_CLOSE frames, are not sent again when packet loss is detected. Resending these signals is described in Section 10.¶
- The current connection maximum data is sent in MAX_DATA frames. An updated value is sent in a MAX_DATA frame if the packet containing the most recently sent MAX_DATA frame is declared lost or when the endpoint decides to update the limit. Care is necessary to avoid sending this frame too often, as the limit can increase frequently and cause an unnecessarily large number of MAX_DATA frames to be sent; see Section 4.2.¶
- The current maximum stream data offset is sent in MAX_STREAM_DATA frames. Like MAX_DATA, an updated value is sent when the packet containing the most recent MAX_STREAM_DATA frame for a stream is lost or when the limit is updated, with care taken to prevent the frame from being sent too often. An endpoint SHOULD stop sending MAX_STREAM_DATA frames when the receiving part of the stream enters a "Size Known" or "Reset Recvd" state.¶
- The limit on streams of a given type is sent in MAX_STREAMS frames. Like MAX_DATA, an updated value is sent when a packet containing the most recent MAX_STREAMS for a stream type frame is declared lost or when the limit is updated, with care taken to prevent the frame from being sent too often.¶
- Blocked signals are carried in DATA_BLOCKED, STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED, and STREAMS_BLOCKED frames. DATA_BLOCKED frames have connection scope, STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frames have stream scope, and STREAMS_BLOCKED frames are scoped to a specific stream type. A new frame is sent if a packet containing the most recent frame for a scope is lost, but only while the endpoint is blocked on the corresponding limit. These frames always include the limit that is causing blocking at the time that they are transmitted.¶
- A liveness or path validation check using PATH_CHALLENGE frames is sent periodically until a matching PATH_RESPONSE frame is received or until there is no remaining need for liveness or path validation checking. PATH_CHALLENGE frames include a different payload each time they are sent.¶
- Responses to path validation using PATH_RESPONSE frames are sent just once. The peer is expected to send more PATH_CHALLENGE frames as necessary to evoke additional PATH_RESPONSE frames.¶
- New connection IDs are sent in NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames and retransmitted if the packet containing them is lost. Retransmissions of this frame carry the same sequence number value. Likewise, retired connection IDs are sent in RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames and retransmitted if the packet containing them is lost.¶
- NEW_TOKEN frames are retransmitted if the packet containing them is lost. No special support is made for detecting reordered and duplicated NEW_TOKEN frames other than a direct comparison of the frame contents.¶
- PING and PADDING frames contain no information, so lost PING or PADDING frames do not require repair.¶
- The HANDSHAKE_DONE frame MUST be retransmitted until it is acknowledged.¶

Endpoints SHOULD prioritize retransmission of data over sending new data, unless priorities specified by the application indicate otherwise; see Section 2.3.¶

Even though a sender is encouraged to assemble frames containing up-to-date information every time it sends a packet, it is not forbidden to retransmit copies of frames from lost packets. A sender that retransmits copies of frames needs to handle decreases in available payload size due to changes in packet number length, connection ID length, and path MTU. A receiver MUST accept packets containing an outdated frame, such as a MAX_DATA frame carrying a smaller maximum data value than one found in an older packet.¶

A sender SHOULD avoid retransmitting information from packets once they are acknowledged. This includes packets that are acknowledged after being declared lost, which can happen in the presence of network reordering. Doing so requires senders to retain information about packets after they are declared lost. A sender can discard this information after a period of time elapses that adequately allows for reordering, such as a PTO (Section 6.2 of [QUIC-RECOVERY]), or based on other events, such as reaching a memory limit.¶

Upon detecting losses, a sender MUST take appropriate congestion control action. The details of loss detection and congestion control are described in [QUIC-RECOVERY].¶

### 13.4. Explicit Congestion Notification

QUIC endpoints can use ECN [RFC3168] to detect and respond to network congestion. ECN allows an endpoint to set an ECN-Capable Transport (ECT) codepoint in the ECN field of an IP packet. A network node can then indicate congestion by setting the ECN-CE codepoint in the ECN field instead of dropping the packet [RFC8087]. Endpoints react to reported congestion by reducing their sending rate in response, as described in [QUIC-RECOVERY].¶

To enable ECN, a sending QUIC endpoint first determines whether a path supports ECN marking and whether the peer reports the ECN values in received IP headers; see Section 13.4.2.¶

#### 13.4.1. Reporting ECN Counts

The use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN field from an IP packet, which is not possible on all platforms. If an endpoint does not implement ECN support or does not have access to received ECN fields, it does not report ECN counts for packets it receives.¶

Even if an endpoint does not set an ECT field in packets it sends, the endpoint MUST provide feedback about ECN markings it receives, if these are accessible. Failing to report the ECN counts will cause the sender to disable the use of ECN for this connection.¶

On receiving an IP packet with an ECT(0), ECT(1), or ECN-CE codepoint, an ECN-enabled endpoint accesses the ECN field and increases the corresponding ECT(0), ECT(1), or ECN-CE count. These ECN counts are included in subsequent ACK frames; see Sections 13.2 and 19.3.¶

Each packet number space maintains separate acknowledgment state and separate ECN counts. Coalesced QUIC packets (see Section 12.2) share the same IP header so the ECN counts are incremented once for each coalesced QUIC packet.¶

For example, if one each of an Initial, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet are coalesced into a single UDP datagram, the ECN counts for all three packet number spaces will be incremented by one each, based on the ECN field of the single IP header.¶

ECN counts are only incremented when QUIC packets from the received IP packet are processed. As such, duplicate QUIC packets are not processed and do not increase ECN counts; see Section 21.10 for relevant security concerns.¶

#### 13.4.2. ECN Validation

It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop packets that carry a non-zero ECN codepoint. To ensure connectivity in the presence of such devices, an endpoint validates the ECN counts for each network path and disables the use of ECN on that path if errors are detected.¶

To perform ECN validation for a new path:¶

- The endpoint sets an ECT(0) codepoint in the IP header of early outgoing packets sent on a new path to the peer [RFC8311].¶
- The endpoint monitors whether all packets sent with an ECT codepoint are eventually deemed lost (Section 6 of [QUIC-RECOVERY]), indicating that ECN validation has failed.¶

If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might be dropped by a faulty network element, the endpoint could set an ECT codepoint for only the first ten outgoing packets on a path, or for a period of three PTOs (see Section 6.2 of [QUIC-RECOVERY]). If all packets marked with non-zero ECN codepoints are subsequently lost, it can disable marking on the assumption that the marking caused the loss.¶

An endpoint thus attempts to use ECN and validates this for each new connection, when switching to a server's preferred address, and on active connection migration to a new path. Appendix A.4 describes one possible algorithm.¶

Other methods of probing paths for ECN support are possible, as are different marking strategies. Implementations MAY use other methods defined in RFCs; see [RFC8311]. Implementations that use the ECT(1) codepoint need to perform ECN validation using the reported ECT(1) counts.¶

##### 13.4.2.1. Receiving ACK Frames with ECN Counts

Erroneous application of ECN-CE markings by the network can result in degraded connection performance. An endpoint that receives an ACK frame with ECN counts therefore validates the counts before using them. It performs this validation by comparing newly received counts against those from the last successfully processed ACK frame. Any increase in the ECN counts is validated based on the ECN markings that were applied to packets that are newly acknowledged in the ACK frame.¶

If an ACK frame newly acknowledges a packet that the endpoint sent with either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint set, ECN validation fails if the corresponding ECN counts are not present in the ACK frame. This check detects a network element that zeroes the ECN field or a peer that does not report ECN markings.¶

ECN validation also fails if the sum of the increase in ECT(0) and ECN-CE counts is less than the number of newly acknowledged packets that were originally sent with an ECT(0) marking. Similarly, ECN validation fails if the sum of the increases to ECT(1) and ECN-CE counts is less than the number of newly acknowledged packets sent with an ECT(1) marking. These checks can detect remarking of ECN-CE markings by the network.¶

An endpoint could miss acknowledgments for a packet when ACK frames are lost. It is therefore possible for the total increase in ECT(0), ECT(1), and ECN-CE counts to be greater than the number of packets that are newly acknowledged by an ACK frame. This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the total number of packets that are acknowledged.¶

Validating ECN counts from reordered ACK frames can result in failure. An endpoint MUST NOT fail ECN validation as a result of processing an ACK frame that does not increase the largest acknowledged packet number.¶

ECN validation can fail if the received total count for either ECT(0) or ECT(1) exceeds the total number of packets sent with each corresponding ECT codepoint. In particular, validation will fail when an endpoint receives a non-zero ECN count corresponding to an ECT codepoint that it never applied. This check detects when packets are remarked to ECT(0) or ECT(1) in the network.¶

##### 13.4.2.2. ECN Validation Outcomes

If validation fails, then the endpoint MUST disable ECN. It stops setting the ECT codepoint in IP packets that it sends, assuming that either the network path or the peer does not support ECN.¶

Even if validation fails, an endpoint MAY revalidate ECN for the same path at any later time in the connection. An endpoint could continue to periodically attempt validation.¶

Upon successful validation, an endpoint MAY continue to set an ECT codepoint in subsequent packets it sends, with the expectation that the path is ECN capable. Network routing and path elements can change mid-connection; an endpoint MUST disable ECN if validation later fails.¶


## 14. Datagram Size

A UDP datagram can include one or more QUIC packets. The datagram size refers to the total UDP payload size of a single UDP datagram carrying QUIC packets. The datagram size includes one or more QUIC packet headers and protected payloads, but not the UDP or IP headers.¶

The maximum datagram size is defined as the largest size of UDP payload that can be sent across a network path using a single UDP datagram. QUIC MUST NOT be used if the network path cannot support a maximum datagram size of at least 1200 bytes.¶

QUIC assumes a minimum IP packet size of at least 1280 bytes. This is the IPv6 minimum size [IPv6] and is also supported by most modern IPv4 networks. Assuming the minimum IP header size of 40 bytes for IPv6 and 20 bytes for IPv4 and a UDP header size of 8 bytes, this results in a maximum datagram size of 1232 bytes for IPv6 and 1252 bytes for IPv4. Thus, modern IPv4 and all IPv6 network paths are expected to be able to support QUIC.¶

Any maximum datagram size larger than 1200 bytes can be discovered using Path Maximum Transmission Unit Discovery (PMTUD) (see Section 14.2.1) or Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery (DPLPMTUD) (see Section 14.3).¶

Enforcement of the max_udp_payload_size transport parameter (Section 18.2) might act as an additional limit on the maximum datagram size. A sender can avoid exceeding this limit, once the value is known. However, prior to learning the value of the transport parameter, endpoints risk datagrams being lost if they send datagrams larger than the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes.¶

UDP datagrams MUST NOT be fragmented at the IP layer. In IPv4 [IPv4], the Don't Fragment (DF) bit MUST be set if possible, to prevent fragmentation on the path.¶

QUIC sometimes requires datagrams to be no smaller than a certain size; see Section 8.1 as an example. However, the size of a datagram is not authenticated. That is, if an endpoint receives a datagram of a certain size, it cannot know that the sender sent the datagram at the same size. Therefore, an endpoint MUST NOT close a connection when it receives a datagram that does not meet size constraints; the endpoint MAY discard such datagrams.¶

### 14.1. Initial Datagram Size

A client MUST expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying Initial packets to at least the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes by adding PADDING frames to the Initial packet or by coalescing the Initial packet; see Section 12.2. Initial packets can even be coalesced with invalid packets, which a receiver will discard. Similarly, a server MUST expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying ack-eliciting Initial packets to at least the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes.¶

Sending UDP datagrams of this size ensures that the network path supports a reasonable Path Maximum Transmission Unit (PMTU), in both directions. Additionally, a client that expands Initial packets helps reduce the amplitude of amplification attacks caused by server responses toward an unverified client address; see Section 8.¶

Datagrams containing Initial packets MAY exceed 1200 bytes if the sender believes that the network path and peer both support the size that it chooses.¶

A server MUST discard an Initial packet that is carried in a UDP datagram with a payload that is smaller than the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes. A server MAY also immediately close the connection by sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code of PROTOCOL_VIOLATION; see Section 10.2.3.¶

The server MUST also limit the number of bytes it sends before validating the address of the client; see Section 8.¶

### 14.2. Path Maximum Transmission Unit

The PMTU is the maximum size of the entire IP packet, including the IP header, UDP header, and UDP payload. The UDP payload includes one or more QUIC packet headers and protected payloads. The PMTU can depend on path characteristics and can therefore change over time. The largest UDP payload an endpoint sends at any given time is referred to as the endpoint's maximum datagram size.¶

An endpoint SHOULD use DPLPMTUD (Section 14.3) or PMTUD (Section 14.2.1) to determine whether the path to a destination will support a desired maximum datagram size without fragmentation. In the absence of these mechanisms, QUIC endpoints SHOULD NOT send datagrams larger than the smallest allowed maximum datagram size.¶

Both DPLPMTUD and PMTUD send datagrams that are larger than the current maximum datagram size, referred to as PMTU probes. All QUIC packets that are not sent in a PMTU probe SHOULD be sized to fit within the maximum datagram size to avoid the datagram being fragmented or dropped [RFC8085].¶

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PMTU between any pair of local and remote IP addresses cannot support the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes, it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets, except for those in PMTU probes or those containing CONNECTION_CLOSE frames, on the affected path. An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an alternative path cannot be found.¶

Each pair of local and remote addresses could have a different PMTU. QUIC implementations that implement any kind of PMTU discovery therefore SHOULD maintain a maximum datagram size for each combination of local and remote IP addresses.¶

A QUIC implementation MAY be more conservative in computing the maximum datagram size to allow for unknown tunnel overheads or IP header options/extensions.¶

#### 14.2.1. Handling of ICMP Messages by PMTUD

PMTUD [RFC1191] [RFC8201] relies on reception of ICMP messages (that is, IPv6 Packet Too Big (PTB) messages) that indicate when an IP packet is dropped because it is larger than the local router MTU. DPLPMTUD can also optionally use these messages. This use of ICMP messages is potentially vulnerable to attacks by entities that cannot observe packets but might successfully guess the addresses used on the path. These attacks could reduce the PMTU to a bandwidth-inefficient value.¶

An endpoint MUST ignore an ICMP message that claims the PMTU has decreased below QUIC's smallest allowed maximum datagram size.¶

The requirements for generating ICMP [RFC1812] [RFC4443] state that the quoted packet should contain as much of the original packet as possible without exceeding the minimum MTU for the IP version. The size of the quoted packet can actually be smaller, or the information unintelligible, as described in Section 1.1 of [DPLPMTUD].¶

QUIC endpoints using PMTUD SHOULD validate ICMP messages to protect from packet injection as specified in [RFC8201] and Section 5.2 of [RFC8085]. This validation SHOULD use the quoted packet supplied in the payload of an ICMP message to associate the message with a corresponding transport connection (see Section 4.6.1 of [DPLPMTUD]). ICMP message validation MUST include matching IP addresses and UDP ports [RFC8085] and, when possible, connection IDs to an active QUIC session. The endpoint SHOULD ignore all ICMP messages that fail validation.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT increase the PMTU based on ICMP messages; see Item 6 in Section 3 of [DPLPMTUD]. Any reduction in QUIC's maximum datagram size in response to ICMP messages MAY be provisional until QUIC's loss detection algorithm determines that the quoted packet has actually been lost.¶

### 14.3. Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery

DPLPMTUD [DPLPMTUD] relies on tracking loss or acknowledgment of QUIC packets that are carried in PMTU probes. PMTU probes for DPLPMTUD that use the PADDING frame implement "Probing using padding data", as defined in Section 4.1 of [DPLPMTUD].¶

Endpoints SHOULD set the initial value of BASE_PLPMTU (Section 5.1 of [DPLPMTUD]) to be consistent with QUIC's smallest allowed maximum datagram size. The MIN_PLPMTU is the same as the BASE_PLPMTU.¶

QUIC endpoints implementing DPLPMTUD maintain a DPLPMTUD Maximum Packet Size (MPS) (Section 4.4 of [DPLPMTUD]) for each combination of local and remote IP addresses. This corresponds to the maximum datagram size.¶

#### 14.3.1. DPLPMTUD and Initial Connectivity

From the perspective of DPLPMTUD, QUIC is an acknowledged Packetization Layer (PL). A QUIC sender can therefore enter the DPLPMTUD BASE state (Section 5.2 of [DPLPMTUD]) when the QUIC connection handshake has been completed.¶

#### 14.3.2. Validating the Network Path with DPLPMTUD

QUIC is an acknowledged PL; therefore, a QUIC sender does not implement a DPLPMTUD CONFIRMATION_TIMER while in the SEARCH_COMPLETE state; see Section 5.2 of [DPLPMTUD].¶

#### 14.3.3. Handling of ICMP Messages by DPLPMTUD

An endpoint using DPLPMTUD requires the validation of any received ICMP PTB message before using the PTB information, as defined in Section 4.6 of [DPLPMTUD]. In addition to UDP port validation, QUIC validates an ICMP message by using other PL information (e.g., validation of connection IDs in the quoted packet of any received ICMP message).¶

The considerations for processing ICMP messages described in Section 14.2.1 also apply if these messages are used by DPLPMTUD.¶

### 14.4. Sending QUIC PMTU Probes

PMTU probes are ack-eliciting packets.¶

Endpoints could limit the content of PMTU probes to PING and PADDING frames, since packets that are larger than the current maximum datagram size are more likely to be dropped by the network. Loss of a QUIC packet that is carried in a PMTU probe is therefore not a reliable indication of congestion and SHOULD NOT trigger a congestion control reaction; see Item 7 in Section 3 of [DPLPMTUD]. However, PMTU probes consume congestion window, which could delay subsequent transmission by an application.¶

#### 14.4.1. PMTU Probes Containing Source Connection ID

Endpoints that rely on the Destination Connection ID field for routing incoming QUIC packets are likely to require that the connection ID be included in PMTU probes to route any resulting ICMP messages (Section 14.2.1) back to the correct endpoint. However, only long header packets (Section 17.2) contain the Source Connection ID field, and long header packets are not decrypted or acknowledged by the peer once the handshake is complete.¶

One way to construct a PMTU probe is to coalesce (see Section 12.2) a packet with a long header, such as a Handshake or 0-RTT packet (Section 17.2), with a short header packet in a single UDP datagram. If the resulting PMTU probe reaches the endpoint, the packet with the long header will be ignored, but the short header packet will be acknowledged. If the PMTU probe causes an ICMP message to be sent, the first part of the probe will be quoted in that message. If the Source Connection ID field is within the quoted portion of the probe, that could be used for routing or validation of the ICMP message.¶


## 15. Versions

QUIC versions are identified using a 32-bit unsigned number.¶

The version 0x00000000 is reserved to represent version negotiation. This version of the specification is identified by the number 0x00000001.¶

Other versions of QUIC might have different properties from this version. The properties of QUIC that are guaranteed to be consistent across all versions of the protocol are described in [QUIC-INVARIANTS].¶

Version 0x00000001 of QUIC uses TLS as a cryptographic handshake protocol, as described in [QUIC-TLS].¶

Versions with the most significant 16 bits of the version number cleared are reserved for use in future IETF consensus documents.¶

Versions that follow the pattern 0x?a?a?a?a are reserved for use in forcing version negotiation to be exercised -- that is, any version number where the low four bits of all bytes is 1010 (in binary). A client or server MAY advertise support for any of these reserved versions.¶

Reserved version numbers will never represent a real protocol; a client MAY use one of these version numbers with the expectation that the server will initiate version negotiation; a server MAY advertise support for one of these versions and can expect that clients ignore the value.¶


## 16. Variable-Length Integer Encoding

QUIC packets and frames commonly use a variable-length encoding for non-negative integer values. This encoding ensures that smaller integer values need fewer bytes to encode.¶

The QUIC variable-length integer encoding reserves the two most significant bits of the first byte to encode the base-2 logarithm of the integer encoding length in bytes. The integer value is encoded on the remaining bits, in network byte order.¶

This means that integers are encoded on 1, 2, 4, or 8 bytes and can encode 6-, 14-, 30-, or 62-bit values, respectively. Table 4 summarizes the encoding properties.¶

| 2MSB | Length | Usable Bits | Range |
|---|---|---|---|
| 00 | 1 | 6 | 0-63 |
| 01 | 2 | 14 | 0-16383 |
| 10 | 4 | 30 | 0-1073741823 |
| 11 | 8 | 62 | 0-4611686018427387903 |

An example of a decoding algorithm and sample encodings are shown in Appendix A.1.¶

Values do not need to be encoded on the minimum number of bytes necessary, with the sole exception of the Frame Type field; see Section 12.4.¶

Versions (Section 15), packet numbers sent in the header (Section 17.1), and the length of connection IDs in long header packets (Section 17.2) are described using integers but do not use this encoding.¶
