---
title: "RFC 9000: QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport (part 4/9)"
source: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000.html
domain: quic-protocol
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: quic protocol, quic transport, udp transport
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 4/9
---

## 10. Connection Termination

An established QUIC connection can be terminated in one of three ways:¶

- idle timeout (Section 10.1)¶
- immediate close (Section 10.2)¶
- stateless reset (Section 10.3)¶

An endpoint MAY discard connection state if it does not have a validated path on which it can send packets; see Section 8.2.¶

### 10.1. Idle Timeout

If a max_idle_timeout is specified by either endpoint in its transport parameters (Section 18.2), the connection is silently closed and its state is discarded when it remains idle for longer than the minimum of the max_idle_timeout value advertised by both endpoints.¶

Each endpoint advertises a max_idle_timeout, but the effective value at an endpoint is computed as the minimum of the two advertised values (or the sole advertised value, if only one endpoint advertises a non-zero value). By announcing a max_idle_timeout, an endpoint commits to initiating an immediate close (Section 10.2) if it abandons the connection prior to the effective value.¶

An endpoint restarts its idle timer when a packet from its peer is received and processed successfully. An endpoint also restarts its idle timer when sending an ack-eliciting packet if no other ack-eliciting packets have been sent since last receiving and processing a packet. Restarting this timer when sending a packet ensures that connections are not closed after new activity is initiated.¶

To avoid excessively small idle timeout periods, endpoints MUST increase the idle timeout period to be at least three times the current Probe Timeout (PTO). This allows for multiple PTOs to expire, and therefore multiple probes to be sent and lost, prior to idle timeout.¶

#### 10.1.1. Liveness Testing

An endpoint that sends packets close to the effective timeout risks having them be discarded at the peer, since the idle timeout period might have expired at the peer before these packets arrive.¶

An endpoint can send a PING or another ack-eliciting frame to test the connection for liveness if the peer could time out soon, such as within a PTO; see Section 6.2 of [QUIC-RECOVERY]. This is especially useful if any available application data cannot be safely retried. Note that the application determines what data is safe to retry.¶

#### 10.1.2. Deferring Idle Timeout

An endpoint might need to send ack-eliciting packets to avoid an idle timeout if it is expecting response data but does not have or is unable to send application data.¶

An implementation of QUIC might provide applications with an option to defer an idle timeout. This facility could be used when the application wishes to avoid losing state that has been associated with an open connection but does not expect to exchange application data for some time. With this option, an endpoint could send a PING frame (Section 19.2) periodically, which will cause the peer to restart its idle timeout period. Sending a packet containing a PING frame restarts the idle timeout for this endpoint also if this is the first ack-eliciting packet sent since receiving a packet. Sending a PING frame causes the peer to respond with an acknowledgment, which also restarts the idle timeout for the endpoint.¶

Application protocols that use QUIC SHOULD provide guidance on when deferring an idle timeout is appropriate. Unnecessary sending of PING frames could have a detrimental effect on performance.¶

A connection will time out if no packets are sent or received for a period longer than the time negotiated using the max_idle_timeout transport parameter; see Section 10. However, state in middleboxes might time out earlier than that. Though REQ-5 in [RFC4787] recommends a 2-minute timeout interval, experience shows that sending packets every 30 seconds is necessary to prevent the majority of middleboxes from losing state for UDP flows [GATEWAY].¶

### 10.2. Immediate Close

An endpoint sends a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame (Section 19.19) to terminate the connection immediately. A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame causes all streams to immediately become closed; open streams can be assumed to be implicitly reset.¶

After sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, an endpoint immediately enters the closing state; see Section 10.2.1. After receiving a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, endpoints enter the draining state; see Section 10.2.2.¶

Violations of the protocol lead to an immediate close.¶

An immediate close can be used after an application protocol has arranged to close a connection. This might be after the application protocol negotiates a graceful shutdown. The application protocol can exchange messages that are needed for both application endpoints to agree that the connection can be closed, after which the application requests that QUIC close the connection. When QUIC consequently closes the connection, a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an application-supplied error code will be used to signal closure to the peer.¶

The closing and draining connection states exist to ensure that connections close cleanly and that delayed or reordered packets are properly discarded. These states SHOULD persist for at least three times the current PTO interval as defined in [QUIC-RECOVERY].¶

Disposing of connection state prior to exiting the closing or draining state could result in an endpoint generating a Stateless Reset unnecessarily when it receives a late-arriving packet. Endpoints that have some alternative means to ensure that late-arriving packets do not induce a response, such as those that are able to close the UDP socket, MAY end these states earlier to allow for faster resource recovery. Servers that retain an open socket for accepting new connections SHOULD NOT end the closing or draining state early.¶

Once its closing or draining state ends, an endpoint SHOULD discard all connection state. The endpoint MAY send a Stateless Reset in response to any further incoming packets belonging to this connection.¶

#### 10.2.1. Closing Connection State

An endpoint enters the closing state after initiating an immediate close.¶

In the closing state, an endpoint retains only enough information to generate a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and to identify packets as belonging to the connection. An endpoint in the closing state sends a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in response to any incoming packet that it attributes to the connection.¶

An endpoint SHOULD limit the rate at which it generates packets in the closing state. For instance, an endpoint could wait for a progressively increasing number of received packets or amount of time before responding to received packets.¶

An endpoint's selected connection ID and the QUIC version are sufficient information to identify packets for a closing connection; the endpoint MAY discard all other connection state. An endpoint that is closing is not required to process any received frame. An endpoint MAY retain packet protection keys for incoming packets to allow it to read and process a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.¶

An endpoint MAY drop packet protection keys when entering the closing state and send a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in response to any UDP datagram that is received. However, an endpoint that discards packet protection keys cannot identify and discard invalid packets. To avoid being used for an amplification attack, such endpoints MUST limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to three times the cumulative size of the packets that are received and attributed to the connection. To minimize the state that an endpoint maintains for a closing connection, endpoints MAY send the exact same packet in response to any received packet.¶

While in the closing state, an endpoint could receive packets from a new source address, possibly indicating a connection migration; see Section 9. An endpoint in the closing state MUST either discard packets received from an unvalidated address or limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to an unvalidated address to three times the size of packets it receives from that address.¶

An endpoint is not expected to handle key updates when it is closing (Section 6 of [QUIC-TLS]). A key update might prevent the endpoint from moving from the closing state to the draining state, as the endpoint will not be able to process subsequently received packets, but it otherwise has no impact.¶

#### 10.2.2. Draining Connection State

The draining state is entered once an endpoint receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, which indicates that its peer is closing or draining. While otherwise identical to the closing state, an endpoint in the draining state MUST NOT send any packets. Retaining packet protection keys is unnecessary once a connection is in the draining state.¶

An endpoint that receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame MAY send a single packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame before entering the draining state, using a NO_ERROR code if appropriate. An endpoint MUST NOT send further packets. Doing so could result in a constant exchange of CONNECTION_CLOSE frames until one of the endpoints exits the closing state.¶

An endpoint MAY enter the draining state from the closing state if it receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, which indicates that the peer is also closing or draining. In this case, the draining state ends when the closing state would have ended. In other words, the endpoint uses the same end time but ceases transmission of any packets on this connection.¶

#### 10.2.3. Immediate Close during the Handshake

When sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, the goal is to ensure that the peer will process the frame. Generally, this means sending the frame in a packet with the highest level of packet protection to avoid the packet being discarded. After the handshake is confirmed (see Section 4.1.2 of [QUIC-TLS]), an endpoint MUST send any CONNECTION_CLOSE frames in a 1-RTT packet. However, prior to confirming the handshake, it is possible that more advanced packet protection keys are not available to the peer, so another CONNECTION_CLOSE frame MAY be sent in a packet that uses a lower packet protection level. More specifically:¶

- A client will always know whether the server has Handshake keys (see Section 17.2.2.1), but it is possible that a server does not know whether the client has Handshake keys. Under these circumstances, a server SHOULD send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in both Handshake and Initial packets to ensure that at least one of them is processable by the client.¶
- A client that sends a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in a 0-RTT packet cannot be assured that the server has accepted 0-RTT. Sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in an Initial packet makes it more likely that the server can receive the close signal, even if the application error code might not be received.¶
- Prior to confirming the handshake, a peer might be unable to process 1-RTT packets, so an endpoint SHOULD send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in both Handshake and 1-RTT packets. A server SHOULD also send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in an Initial packet.¶

Sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE of type 0x1d in an Initial or Handshake packet could expose application state or be used to alter application state. A CONNECTION_CLOSE of type 0x1d MUST be replaced by a CONNECTION_CLOSE of type 0x1c when sending the frame in Initial or Handshake packets. Otherwise, information about the application state might be revealed. Endpoints MUST clear the value of the Reason Phrase field and SHOULD use the APPLICATION_ERROR code when converting to a CONNECTION_CLOSE of type 0x1c.¶

CONNECTION_CLOSE frames sent in multiple packet types can be coalesced into a single UDP datagram; see Section 12.2.¶

An endpoint can send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in an Initial packet. This might be in response to unauthenticated information received in Initial or Handshake packets. Such an immediate close might expose legitimate connections to a denial of service. QUIC does not include defensive measures for on-path attacks during the handshake; see Section 21.2. However, at the cost of reducing feedback about errors for legitimate peers, some forms of denial of service can be made more difficult for an attacker if endpoints discard illegal packets rather than terminating a connection with CONNECTION_CLOSE. For this reason, endpoints MAY discard packets rather than immediately close if errors are detected in packets that lack authentication.¶

An endpoint that has not established state, such as a server that detects an error in an Initial packet, does not enter the closing state. An endpoint that has no state for the connection does not enter a closing or draining period on sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.¶

### 10.3. Stateless Reset

A stateless reset is provided as an option of last resort for an endpoint that does not have access to the state of a connection. A crash or outage might result in peers continuing to send data to an endpoint that is unable to properly continue the connection. An endpoint MAY send a Stateless Reset in response to receiving a packet that it cannot associate with an active connection.¶

A stateless reset is not appropriate for indicating errors in active connections. An endpoint that wishes to communicate a fatal connection error MUST use a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame if it is able.¶

To support this process, an endpoint issues a stateless reset token, which is a 16-byte value that is hard to guess. If the peer subsequently receives a Stateless Reset, which is a UDP datagram that ends in that stateless reset token, the peer will immediately end the connection.¶

A stateless reset token is specific to a connection ID. An endpoint issues a stateless reset token by including the value in the Stateless Reset Token field of a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame. Servers can also issue a stateless_reset_token transport parameter during the handshake that applies to the connection ID that it selected during the handshake. These exchanges are protected by encryption, so only client and server know their value. Note that clients cannot use the stateless_reset_token transport parameter because their transport parameters do not have confidentiality protection.¶

Tokens are invalidated when their associated connection ID is retired via a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame (Section 19.16).¶

An endpoint that receives packets that it cannot process sends a packet in the following layout (see Section 1.3):¶

```
Stateless Reset {
  Fixed Bits (2) = 1,
  Unpredictable Bits (38..),
  Stateless Reset Token (128),
}
```

This design ensures that a Stateless Reset is -- to the extent possible -- indistinguishable from a regular packet with a short header.¶

A Stateless Reset uses an entire UDP datagram, starting with the first two bits of the packet header. The remainder of the first byte and an arbitrary number of bytes following it are set to values that SHOULD be indistinguishable from random. The last 16 bytes of the datagram contain a stateless reset token.¶

To entities other than its intended recipient, a Stateless Reset will appear to be a packet with a short header. For the Stateless Reset to appear as a valid QUIC packet, the Unpredictable Bits field needs to include at least 38 bits of data (or 5 bytes, less the two fixed bits).¶

The resulting minimum size of 21 bytes does not guarantee that a Stateless Reset is difficult to distinguish from other packets if the recipient requires the use of a connection ID. To achieve that end, the endpoint SHOULD ensure that all packets it sends are at least 22 bytes longer than the minimum connection ID length that it requests the peer to include in its packets, adding PADDING frames as necessary. This ensures that any Stateless Reset sent by the peer is indistinguishable from a valid packet sent to the endpoint. An endpoint that sends a Stateless Reset in response to a packet that is 43 bytes or shorter SHOULD send a Stateless Reset that is one byte shorter than the packet it responds to.¶

These values assume that the stateless reset token is the same length as the minimum expansion of the packet protection AEAD. Additional unpredictable bytes are necessary if the endpoint could have negotiated a packet protection scheme with a larger minimum expansion.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT send a Stateless Reset that is three times or more larger than the packet it receives to avoid being used for amplification. Section 10.3.3 describes additional limits on Stateless Reset size.¶

Endpoints MUST discard packets that are too small to be valid QUIC packets. To give an example, with the set of AEAD functions defined in [QUIC-TLS], short header packets that are smaller than 21 bytes are never valid.¶

Endpoints MUST send Stateless Resets formatted as a packet with a short header. However, endpoints MUST treat any packet ending in a valid stateless reset token as a Stateless Reset, as other QUIC versions might allow the use of a long header.¶

An endpoint MAY send a Stateless Reset in response to a packet with a long header. Sending a Stateless Reset is not effective prior to the stateless reset token being available to a peer. In this QUIC version, packets with a long header are only used during connection establishment. Because the stateless reset token is not available until connection establishment is complete or near completion, ignoring an unknown packet with a long header might be as effective as sending a Stateless Reset.¶

An endpoint cannot determine the Source Connection ID from a packet with a short header; therefore, it cannot set the Destination Connection ID in the Stateless Reset. The Destination Connection ID will therefore differ from the value used in previous packets. A random Destination Connection ID makes the connection ID appear to be the result of moving to a new connection ID that was provided using a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame; see Section 19.15.¶

Using a randomized connection ID results in two problems:¶

- The packet might not reach the peer. If the Destination Connection ID is critical for routing toward the peer, then this packet could be incorrectly routed. This might also trigger another Stateless Reset in response; see Section 10.3.3. A Stateless Reset that is not correctly routed is an ineffective error detection and recovery mechanism. In this case, endpoints will need to rely on other methods -- such as timers -- to detect that the connection has failed.¶
- The randomly generated connection ID can be used by entities other than the peer to identify this as a potential Stateless Reset. An endpoint that occasionally uses different connection IDs might introduce some uncertainty about this.¶

This stateless reset design is specific to QUIC version 1. An endpoint that supports multiple versions of QUIC needs to generate a Stateless Reset that will be accepted by peers that support any version that the endpoint might support (or might have supported prior to losing state). Designers of new versions of QUIC need to be aware of this and either (1) reuse this design or (2) use a portion of the packet other than the last 16 bytes for carrying data.¶

#### 10.3.1. Detecting a Stateless Reset

An endpoint detects a potential Stateless Reset using the trailing 16 bytes of the UDP datagram. An endpoint remembers all stateless reset tokens associated with the connection IDs and remote addresses for datagrams it has recently sent. This includes Stateless Reset Token field values from NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames and the server's transport parameters but excludes stateless reset tokens associated with connection IDs that are either unused or retired. The endpoint identifies a received datagram as a Stateless Reset by comparing the last 16 bytes of the datagram with all stateless reset tokens associated with the remote address on which the datagram was received.¶

This comparison can be performed for every inbound datagram. Endpoints MAY skip this check if any packet from a datagram is successfully processed. However, the comparison MUST be performed when the first packet in an incoming datagram either cannot be associated with a connection or cannot be decrypted.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT check for any stateless reset tokens associated with connection IDs it has not used or for connection IDs that have been retired.¶

When comparing a datagram to stateless reset token values, endpoints MUST perform the comparison without leaking information about the value of the token. For example, performing this comparison in constant time protects the value of individual stateless reset tokens from information leakage through timing side channels. Another approach would be to store and compare the transformed values of stateless reset tokens instead of the raw token values, where the transformation is defined as a cryptographically secure pseudorandom function using a secret key (e.g., block cipher, Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) [RFC2104]). An endpoint is not expected to protect information about whether a packet was successfully decrypted or the number of valid stateless reset tokens.¶

If the last 16 bytes of the datagram are identical in value to a stateless reset token, the endpoint MUST enter the draining period and not send any further packets on this connection.¶

#### 10.3.2. Calculating a Stateless Reset Token

The stateless reset token MUST be difficult to guess. In order to create a stateless reset token, an endpoint could randomly generate [RANDOM] a secret for every connection that it creates. However, this presents a coordination problem when there are multiple instances in a cluster or a storage problem for an endpoint that might lose state. Stateless reset specifically exists to handle the case where state is lost, so this approach is suboptimal.¶

A single static key can be used across all connections to the same endpoint by generating the proof using a pseudorandom function that takes a static key and the connection ID chosen by the endpoint (see Section 5.1) as input. An endpoint could use HMAC [RFC2104] (for example, HMAC(static_key, connection_id)) or the HMAC-based Key Derivation Function (HKDF) [RFC5869] (for example, using the static key as input keying material, with the connection ID as salt). The output of this function is truncated to 16 bytes to produce the stateless reset token for that connection.¶

An endpoint that loses state can use the same method to generate a valid stateless reset token. The connection ID comes from the packet that the endpoint receives.¶

This design relies on the peer always sending a connection ID in its packets so that the endpoint can use the connection ID from a packet to reset the connection. An endpoint that uses this design MUST either use the same connection ID length for all connections or encode the length of the connection ID such that it can be recovered without state. In addition, it cannot provide a zero-length connection ID.¶

Revealing the stateless reset token allows any entity to terminate the connection, so a value can only be used once. This method for choosing the stateless reset token means that the combination of connection ID and static key MUST NOT be used for another connection. A denial-of-service attack is possible if the same connection ID is used by instances that share a static key or if an attacker can cause a packet to be routed to an instance that has no state but the same static key; see Section 21.11. A connection ID from a connection that is reset by revealing the stateless reset token MUST NOT be reused for new connections at nodes that share a static key.¶

The same stateless reset token MUST NOT be used for multiple connection IDs. Endpoints are not required to compare new values against all previous values, but a duplicate value MAY be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

Note that Stateless Resets do not have any cryptographic protection.¶

#### 10.3.3. Looping

The design of a Stateless Reset is such that without knowing the stateless reset token it is indistinguishable from a valid packet. For instance, if a server sends a Stateless Reset to another server, it might receive another Stateless Reset in response, which could lead to an infinite exchange.¶

An endpoint MUST ensure that every Stateless Reset that it sends is smaller than the packet that triggered it, unless it maintains state sufficient to prevent looping. In the event of a loop, this results in packets eventually being too small to trigger a response.¶

An endpoint can remember the number of Stateless Resets that it has sent and stop generating new Stateless Resets once a limit is reached. Using separate limits for different remote addresses will ensure that Stateless Resets can be used to close connections when other peers or connections have exhausted limits.¶

A Stateless Reset that is smaller than 41 bytes might be identifiable as a Stateless Reset by an observer, depending upon the length of the peer's connection IDs. Conversely, not sending a Stateless Reset in response to a small packet might result in Stateless Resets not being useful in detecting cases of broken connections where only very small packets are sent; such failures might only be detected by other means, such as timers.¶


## 11. Error Handling

An endpoint that detects an error SHOULD signal the existence of that error to its peer. Both transport-level and application-level errors can affect an entire connection; see Section 11.1. Only application-level errors can be isolated to a single stream; see Section 11.2.¶

The most appropriate error code (Section 20) SHOULD be included in the frame that signals the error. Where this specification identifies error conditions, it also identifies the error code that is used; though these are worded as requirements, different implementation strategies might lead to different errors being reported. In particular, an endpoint MAY use any applicable error code when it detects an error condition; a generic error code (such as PROTOCOL_VIOLATION or INTERNAL_ERROR) can always be used in place of specific error codes.¶

A stateless reset (Section 10.3) is not suitable for any error that can be signaled with a CONNECTION_CLOSE or RESET_STREAM frame. A stateless reset MUST NOT be used by an endpoint that has the state necessary to send a frame on the connection.¶

### 11.1. Connection Errors

Errors that result in the connection being unusable, such as an obvious violation of protocol semantics or corruption of state that affects an entire connection, MUST be signaled using a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame (Section 19.19).¶

Application-specific protocol errors are signaled using the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a frame type of 0x1d. Errors that are specific to the transport, including all those described in this document, are carried in the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a frame type of 0x1c.¶

A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame could be sent in a packet that is lost. An endpoint SHOULD be prepared to retransmit a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame if it receives more packets on a terminated connection. Limiting the number of retransmissions and the time over which this final packet is sent limits the effort expended on terminated connections.¶

An endpoint that chooses not to retransmit packets containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame risks a peer missing the first such packet. The only mechanism available to an endpoint that continues to receive data for a terminated connection is to attempt the stateless reset process (Section 10.3).¶

As the AEAD for Initial packets does not provide strong authentication, an endpoint MAY discard an invalid Initial packet. Discarding an Initial packet is permitted even where this specification otherwise mandates a connection error. An endpoint can only discard a packet if it does not process the frames in the packet or reverts the effects of any processing. Discarding invalid Initial packets might be used to reduce exposure to denial of service; see Section 21.2.¶

### 11.2. Stream Errors

If an application-level error affects a single stream but otherwise leaves the connection in a recoverable state, the endpoint can send a RESET_STREAM frame (Section 19.4) with an appropriate error code to terminate just the affected stream.¶

Resetting a stream without the involvement of the application protocol could cause the application protocol to enter an unrecoverable state. RESET_STREAM MUST only be instigated by the application protocol that uses QUIC.¶

The semantics of the application error code carried in RESET_STREAM are defined by the application protocol. Only the application protocol is able to cause a stream to be terminated. A local instance of the application protocol uses a direct API call, and a remote instance uses the STOP_SENDING frame, which triggers an automatic RESET_STREAM.¶

Application protocols SHOULD define rules for handling streams that are prematurely canceled by either endpoint.¶


## 12. Packets and Frames

QUIC endpoints communicate by exchanging packets. Packets have confidentiality and integrity protection; see Section 12.1. Packets are carried in UDP datagrams; see Section 12.2.¶

This version of QUIC uses the long packet header during connection establishment; see Section 17.2. Packets with the long header are Initial (Section 17.2.2), 0-RTT (Section 17.2.3), Handshake (Section 17.2.4), and Retry (Section 17.2.5). Version negotiation uses a version-independent packet with a long header; see Section 17.2.1.¶

Packets with the short header are designed for minimal overhead and are used after a connection is established and 1-RTT keys are available; see Section 17.3.¶

### 12.1. Protected Packets

QUIC packets have different levels of cryptographic protection based on the type of packet. Details of packet protection are found in [QUIC-TLS]; this section includes an overview of the protections that are provided.¶

Version Negotiation packets have no cryptographic protection; see [QUIC-INVARIANTS].¶

Retry packets use an AEAD function [AEAD] to protect against accidental modification.¶

Initial packets use an AEAD function, the keys for which are derived using a value that is visible on the wire. Initial packets therefore do not have effective confidentiality protection. Initial protection exists to ensure that the sender of the packet is on the network path. Any entity that receives an Initial packet from a client can recover the keys that will allow them to both read the contents of the packet and generate Initial packets that will be successfully authenticated at either endpoint. The AEAD also protects Initial packets against accidental modification.¶

All other packets are protected with keys derived from the cryptographic handshake. The cryptographic handshake ensures that only the communicating endpoints receive the corresponding keys for Handshake, 0-RTT, and 1-RTT packets. Packets protected with 0-RTT and 1-RTT keys have strong confidentiality and integrity protection.¶

The Packet Number field that appears in some packet types has alternative confidentiality protection that is applied as part of header protection; see Section 5.4 of [QUIC-TLS] for details. The underlying packet number increases with each packet sent in a given packet number space; see Section 12.3 for details.¶

### 12.2. Coalescing Packets

Initial (Section 17.2.2), 0-RTT (Section 17.2.3), and Handshake (Section 17.2.4) packets contain a Length field that determines the end of the packet. The length includes both the Packet Number and Payload fields, both of which are confidentiality protected and initially of unknown length. The length of the Payload field is learned once header protection is removed.¶

Using the Length field, a sender can coalesce multiple QUIC packets into one UDP datagram. This can reduce the number of UDP datagrams needed to complete the cryptographic handshake and start sending data. This can also be used to construct Path Maximum Transmission Unit (PMTU) probes; see Section 14.4.1. Receivers MUST be able to process coalesced packets.¶

Coalescing packets in order of increasing encryption levels (Initial, 0-RTT, Handshake, 1-RTT; see Section 4.1.4 of [QUIC-TLS]) makes it more likely that the receiver will be able to process all the packets in a single pass. A packet with a short header does not include a length, so it can only be the last packet included in a UDP datagram. An endpoint SHOULD include multiple frames in a single packet if they are to be sent at the same encryption level, instead of coalescing multiple packets at the same encryption level.¶

Receivers MAY route based on the information in the first packet contained in a UDP datagram. Senders MUST NOT coalesce QUIC packets with different connection IDs into a single UDP datagram. Receivers SHOULD ignore any subsequent packets with a different Destination Connection ID than the first packet in the datagram.¶

Every QUIC packet that is coalesced into a single UDP datagram is separate and complete. The receiver of coalesced QUIC packets MUST individually process each QUIC packet and separately acknowledge them, as if they were received as the payload of different UDP datagrams. For example, if decryption fails (because the keys are not available or for any other reason), the receiver MAY either discard or buffer the packet for later processing and MUST attempt to process the remaining packets.¶

Retry packets (Section 17.2.5), Version Negotiation packets (Section 17.2.1), and packets with a short header (Section 17.3) do not contain a Length field and so cannot be followed by other packets in the same UDP datagram. Note also that there is no situation where a Retry or Version Negotiation packet is coalesced with another packet.¶

### 12.3. Packet Numbers

The packet number is an integer in the range 0 to 262-1. This number is used in determining the cryptographic nonce for packet protection. Each endpoint maintains a separate packet number for sending and receiving.¶

Packet numbers are limited to this range because they need to be representable in whole in the Largest Acknowledged field of an ACK frame (Section 19.3). When present in a long or short header, however, packet numbers are reduced and encoded in 1 to 4 bytes; see Section 17.1.¶

Version Negotiation (Section 17.2.1) and Retry (Section 17.2.5) packets do not include a packet number.¶

Packet numbers are divided into three spaces in QUIC:¶

**Initial space:**

All Initial packets (Section 17.2.2) are in this space.¶

**Handshake space:**

All Handshake packets (Section 17.2.4) are in this space.¶

**Application data space:**

All 0-RTT (Section 17.2.3) and 1-RTT (Section 17.3.1) packets are in this space.¶

As described in [QUIC-TLS], each packet type uses different protection keys.¶

Conceptually, a packet number space is the context in which a packet can be processed and acknowledged. Initial packets can only be sent with Initial packet protection keys and acknowledged in packets that are also Initial packets. Similarly, Handshake packets are sent at the Handshake encryption level and can only be acknowledged in Handshake packets.¶

This enforces cryptographic separation between the data sent in the different packet number spaces. Packet numbers in each space start at packet number 0. Subsequent packets sent in the same packet number space MUST increase the packet number by at least one.¶

0-RTT and 1-RTT data exist in the same packet number space to make loss recovery algorithms easier to implement between the two packet types.¶

A QUIC endpoint MUST NOT reuse a packet number within the same packet number space in one connection. If the packet number for sending reaches 262-1, the sender MUST close the connection without sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame or any further packets; an endpoint MAY send a Stateless Reset (Section 10.3) in response to further packets that it receives.¶

A receiver MUST discard a newly unprotected packet unless it is certain that it has not processed another packet with the same packet number from the same packet number space. Duplicate suppression MUST happen after removing packet protection for the reasons described in Section 9.5 of [QUIC-TLS].¶

Endpoints that track all individual packets for the purposes of detecting duplicates are at risk of accumulating excessive state. The data required for detecting duplicates can be limited by maintaining a minimum packet number below which all packets are immediately dropped. Any minimum needs to account for large variations in round-trip time, which includes the possibility that a peer might probe network paths with much larger round-trip times; see Section 9.¶

Packet number encoding at a sender and decoding at a receiver are described in Section 17.1.¶

### 12.4. Frames and Frame Types

The payload of QUIC packets, after removing packet protection, consists of a sequence of complete frames, as shown in Figure 11. Version Negotiation, Stateless Reset, and Retry packets do not contain frames.¶

```
Packet Payload {
  Frame (8..) ...,
}
```

The payload of a packet that contains frames MUST contain at least one frame, and MAY contain multiple frames and multiple frame types. An endpoint MUST treat receipt of a packet containing no frames as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION. Frames always fit within a single QUIC packet and cannot span multiple packets.¶

Each frame begins with a Frame Type, indicating its type, followed by additional type-dependent fields:¶

```
Frame {
  Frame Type (i),
  Type-Dependent Fields (..),
}
```

Table 3 lists and summarizes information about each frame type that is defined in this specification. A description of this summary is included after the table.¶

| Type Value | Frame Type Name | Definition | Pkts | Spec |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0x00 | PADDING | Section 19.1 | IH01 | NP |
| 0x01 | PING | Section 19.2 | IH01 |   |
| 0x02-0x03 | ACK | Section 19.3 | IH_1 | NC |
| 0x04 | RESET_STREAM | Section 19.4 | __01 |   |
| 0x05 | STOP_SENDING | Section 19.5 | __01 |   |
| 0x06 | CRYPTO | Section 19.6 | IH_1 |   |
| 0x07 | NEW_TOKEN | Section 19.7 | ___1 |   |
| 0x08-0x0f | STREAM | Section 19.8 | __01 | F |
| 0x10 | MAX_DATA | Section 19.9 | __01 |   |
| 0x11 | MAX_STREAM_DATA | Section 19.10 | __01 |   |
| 0x12-0x13 | MAX_STREAMS | Section 19.11 | __01 |   |
| 0x14 | DATA_BLOCKED | Section 19.12 | __01 |   |
| 0x15 | STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED | Section 19.13 | __01 |   |
| 0x16-0x17 | STREAMS_BLOCKED | Section 19.14 | __01 |   |
| 0x18 | NEW_CONNECTION_ID | Section 19.15 | __01 | P |
| 0x19 | RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID | Section 19.16 | __01 |   |
| 0x1a | PATH_CHALLENGE | Section 19.17 | __01 | P |
| 0x1b | PATH_RESPONSE | Section 19.18 | ___1 | P |
| 0x1c-0x1d | CONNECTION_CLOSE | Section 19.19 | ih01 | N |
| 0x1e | HANDSHAKE_DONE | Section 19.20 | ___1 |   |

The format and semantics of each frame type are explained in more detail in Section 19. The remainder of this section provides a summary of important and general information.¶

The Frame Type in ACK, STREAM, MAX_STREAMS, STREAMS_BLOCKED, and CONNECTION_CLOSE frames is used to carry other frame-specific flags. For all other frames, the Frame Type field simply identifies the frame.¶

The "Pkts" column in Table 3 lists the types of packets that each frame type could appear in, indicated by the following characters:¶

**I:**

Initial (Section 17.2.2)¶

**H:**

Handshake (Section 17.2.4)¶

**0:**

0-RTT (Section 17.2.3)¶

**1:**

1-RTT (Section 17.3.1)¶

**ih:**

Only a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame of type 0x1c can appear in Initial or Handshake packets.¶

For more details about these restrictions, see Section 12.5. Note that all frames can appear in 1-RTT packets. An endpoint MUST treat receipt of a frame in a packet type that is not permitted as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

The "Spec" column in Table 3 summarizes any special rules governing the processing or generation of the frame type, as indicated by the following characters:¶

**N:**

Packets containing only frames with this marking are not ack-eliciting; see Section 13.2.¶

**C:**

Packets containing only frames with this marking do not count toward bytes in flight for congestion control purposes; see [QUIC-RECOVERY].¶

**P:**

Packets containing only frames with this marking can be used to probe new network paths during connection migration; see Section 9.1.¶

**F:**

The contents of frames with this marking are flow controlled; see Section 4.¶

The "Pkts" and "Spec" columns in Table 3 do not form part of the IANA registry; see Section 22.4.¶

An endpoint MUST treat the receipt of a frame of unknown type as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

All frames are idempotent in this version of QUIC. That is, a valid frame does not cause undesirable side effects or errors when received more than once.¶

The Frame Type field uses a variable-length integer encoding (see Section 16), with one exception. To ensure simple and efficient implementations of frame parsing, a frame type MUST use the shortest possible encoding. For frame types defined in this document, this means a single-byte encoding, even though it is possible to encode these values as a two-, four-, or eight-byte variable-length integer. For instance, though 0x4001 is a legitimate two-byte encoding for a variable-length integer with a value of 1, PING frames are always encoded as a single byte with the value 0x01. This rule applies to all current and future QUIC frame types. An endpoint MAY treat the receipt of a frame type that uses a longer encoding than necessary as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

### 12.5. Frames and Number Spaces

Some frames are prohibited in different packet number spaces. The rules here generalize those of TLS, in that frames associated with establishing the connection can usually appear in packets in any packet number space, whereas those associated with transferring data can only appear in the application data packet number space:¶

- PADDING, PING, and CRYPTO frames MAY appear in any packet number space.¶
- CONNECTION_CLOSE frames signaling errors at the QUIC layer (type 0x1c) MAY appear in any packet number space. CONNECTION_CLOSE frames signaling application errors (type 0x1d) MUST only appear in the application data packet number space.¶
- ACK frames MAY appear in any packet number space but can only acknowledge packets that appeared in that packet number space. However, as noted below, 0-RTT packets cannot contain ACK frames.¶
- All other frame types MUST only be sent in the application data packet number space.¶

Note that it is not possible to send the following frames in 0-RTT packets for various reasons: ACK, CRYPTO, HANDSHAKE_DONE, NEW_TOKEN, PATH_RESPONSE, and RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID. A server MAY treat receipt of these frames in 0-RTT packets as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶
