---
title: "RFC 9000: QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport (part 7/9)"
source: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000.html
domain: quic-protocol
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: quic protocol, quic transport, udp transport
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 7/9
---

## 19. Frame Types and Formats

As described in Section 12.4, packets contain one or more frames. This section describes the format and semantics of the core QUIC frame types.¶

### 19.1. PADDING Frames

A PADDING frame (type=0x00) has no semantic value. PADDING frames can be used to increase the size of a packet. Padding can be used to increase an Initial packet to the minimum required size or to provide protection against traffic analysis for protected packets.¶

PADDING frames are formatted as shown in Figure 23, which shows that PADDING frames have no content. That is, a PADDING frame consists of the single byte that identifies the frame as a PADDING frame.¶

```
PADDING Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x00,
}
```

### 19.2. PING Frames

Endpoints can use PING frames (type=0x01) to verify that their peers are still alive or to check reachability to the peer.¶

PING frames are formatted as shown in Figure 24, which shows that PING frames have no content.¶

```
PING Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x01,
}
```

The receiver of a PING frame simply needs to acknowledge the packet containing this frame.¶

The PING frame can be used to keep a connection alive when an application or application protocol wishes to prevent the connection from timing out; see Section 10.1.2.¶

### 19.3. ACK Frames

Receivers send ACK frames (types 0x02 and 0x03) to inform senders of packets they have received and processed. The ACK frame contains one or more ACK Ranges. ACK Ranges identify acknowledged packets. If the frame type is 0x03, ACK frames also contain the cumulative count of QUIC packets with associated ECN marks received on the connection up until this point. QUIC implementations MUST properly handle both types, and, if they have enabled ECN for packets they send, they SHOULD use the information in the ECN section to manage their congestion state.¶

QUIC acknowledgments are irrevocable. Once acknowledged, a packet remains acknowledged, even if it does not appear in a future ACK frame. This is unlike reneging for TCP Selective Acknowledgments (SACKs) [RFC2018].¶

Packets from different packet number spaces can be identified using the same numeric value. An acknowledgment for a packet needs to indicate both a packet number and a packet number space. This is accomplished by having each ACK frame only acknowledge packet numbers in the same space as the packet in which the ACK frame is contained.¶

Version Negotiation and Retry packets cannot be acknowledged because they do not contain a packet number. Rather than relying on ACK frames, these packets are implicitly acknowledged by the next Initial packet sent by the client.¶

ACK frames are formatted as shown in Figure 25.¶

```
ACK Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x02..0x03,
  Largest Acknowledged (i),
  ACK Delay (i),
  ACK Range Count (i),
  First ACK Range (i),
  ACK Range (..) ...,
  [ECN Counts (..)],
}
```

ACK frames contain the following fields:¶

**Largest Acknowledged:**

A variable-length integer representing the largest packet number the peer is acknowledging; this is usually the largest packet number that the peer has received prior to generating the ACK frame. Unlike the packet number in the QUIC long or short header, the value in an ACK frame is not truncated.¶

**ACK Delay:**

A variable-length integer encoding the acknowledgment delay in microseconds; see Section 13.2.5. It is decoded by multiplying the value in the field by 2 to the power of the ack_delay_exponent transport parameter sent by the sender of the ACK frame; see Section 18.2. Compared to simply expressing the delay as an integer, this encoding allows for a larger range of values within the same number of bytes, at the cost of lower resolution.¶

**ACK Range Count:**

A variable-length integer specifying the number of ACK Range fields in the frame.¶

**First ACK Range:**

A variable-length integer indicating the number of contiguous packets preceding the Largest Acknowledged that are being acknowledged. That is, the smallest packet acknowledged in the range is determined by subtracting the First ACK Range value from the Largest Acknowledged field.¶

**ACK Ranges:**

Contains additional ranges of packets that are alternately not acknowledged (Gap) and acknowledged (ACK Range); see Section 19.3.1.¶

**ECN Counts:**

The three ECN counts; see Section 19.3.2.¶

#### 19.3.1. ACK Ranges

Each ACK Range consists of alternating Gap and ACK Range Length values in descending packet number order. ACK Ranges can be repeated. The number of Gap and ACK Range Length values is determined by the ACK Range Count field; one of each value is present for each value in the ACK Range Count field.¶

ACK Ranges are structured as shown in Figure 26.¶

```
ACK Range {
  Gap (i),
  ACK Range Length (i),
}
```

The fields that form each ACK Range are:¶

**Gap:**

A variable-length integer indicating the number of contiguous unacknowledged packets preceding the packet number one lower than the smallest in the preceding ACK Range.¶

**ACK Range Length:**

A variable-length integer indicating the number of contiguous acknowledged packets preceding the largest packet number, as determined by the preceding Gap.¶

Gap and ACK Range Length values use a relative integer encoding for efficiency. Though each encoded value is positive, the values are subtracted, so that each ACK Range describes progressively lower-numbered packets.¶

Each ACK Range acknowledges a contiguous range of packets by indicating the number of acknowledged packets that precede the largest packet number in that range. A value of 0 indicates that only the largest packet number is acknowledged. Larger ACK Range values indicate a larger range, with corresponding lower values for the smallest packet number in the range. Thus, given a largest packet number for the range, the smallest value is determined by the following formula:¶

```
   smallest = largest - ack_range
```

¶

An ACK Range acknowledges all packets between the smallest packet number and the largest, inclusive.¶

The largest value for an ACK Range is determined by cumulatively subtracting the size of all preceding ACK Range Lengths and Gaps.¶

Each Gap indicates a range of packets that are not being acknowledged. The number of packets in the gap is one higher than the encoded value of the Gap field.¶

The value of the Gap field establishes the largest packet number value for the subsequent ACK Range using the following formula:¶

```
   largest = previous_smallest - gap - 2
```

¶

If any computed packet number is negative, an endpoint MUST generate a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

#### 19.3.2. ECN Counts

The ACK frame uses the least significant bit of the type value (that is, type 0x03) to indicate ECN feedback and report receipt of QUIC packets with associated ECN codepoints of ECT(0), ECT(1), or ECN-CE in the packet's IP header. ECN counts are only present when the ACK frame type is 0x03.¶

When present, there are three ECN counts, as shown in Figure 27.¶

```
ECN Counts {
  ECT0 Count (i),
  ECT1 Count (i),
  ECN-CE Count (i),
}
```

The ECN count fields are:¶

**ECT0 Count:**

A variable-length integer representing the total number of packets received with the ECT(0) codepoint in the packet number space of the ACK frame.¶

**ECT1 Count:**

A variable-length integer representing the total number of packets received with the ECT(1) codepoint in the packet number space of the ACK frame.¶

**ECN-CE Count:**

A variable-length integer representing the total number of packets received with the ECN-CE codepoint in the packet number space of the ACK frame.¶

ECN counts are maintained separately for each packet number space.¶

### 19.4. RESET_STREAM Frames

An endpoint uses a RESET_STREAM frame (type=0x04) to abruptly terminate the sending part of a stream.¶

After sending a RESET_STREAM, an endpoint ceases transmission and retransmission of STREAM frames on the identified stream. A receiver of RESET_STREAM can discard any data that it already received on that stream.¶

An endpoint that receives a RESET_STREAM frame for a send-only stream MUST terminate the connection with error STREAM_STATE_ERROR.¶

RESET_STREAM frames are formatted as shown in Figure 28.¶

```
RESET_STREAM Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x04,
  Stream ID (i),
  Application Protocol Error Code (i),
  Final Size (i),
}
```

RESET_STREAM frames contain the following fields:¶

**Stream ID:**

A variable-length integer encoding of the stream ID of the stream being terminated.¶

**Application Protocol Error Code:**

A variable-length integer containing the application protocol error code (see Section 20.2) that indicates why the stream is being closed.¶

**Final Size:**

A variable-length integer indicating the final size of the stream by the RESET_STREAM sender, in units of bytes; see Section 4.5.¶

### 19.5. STOP_SENDING Frames

An endpoint uses a STOP_SENDING frame (type=0x05) to communicate that incoming data is being discarded on receipt per application request. STOP_SENDING requests that a peer cease transmission on a stream.¶

A STOP_SENDING frame can be sent for streams in the "Recv" or "Size Known" states; see Section 3.2. Receiving a STOP_SENDING frame for a locally initiated stream that has not yet been created MUST be treated as a connection error of type STREAM_STATE_ERROR. An endpoint that receives a STOP_SENDING frame for a receive-only stream MUST terminate the connection with error STREAM_STATE_ERROR.¶

STOP_SENDING frames are formatted as shown in Figure 29.¶

```
STOP_SENDING Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x05,
  Stream ID (i),
  Application Protocol Error Code (i),
}
```

STOP_SENDING frames contain the following fields:¶

**Stream ID:**

A variable-length integer carrying the stream ID of the stream being ignored.¶

**Application Protocol Error Code:**

A variable-length integer containing the application-specified reason the sender is ignoring the stream; see Section 20.2.¶

### 19.6. CRYPTO Frames

A CRYPTO frame (type=0x06) is used to transmit cryptographic handshake messages. It can be sent in all packet types except 0-RTT. The CRYPTO frame offers the cryptographic protocol an in-order stream of bytes. CRYPTO frames are functionally identical to STREAM frames, except that they do not bear a stream identifier; they are not flow controlled; and they do not carry markers for optional offset, optional length, and the end of the stream.¶

CRYPTO frames are formatted as shown in Figure 30.¶

```
CRYPTO Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x06,
  Offset (i),
  Length (i),
  Crypto Data (..),
}
```

CRYPTO frames contain the following fields:¶

**Offset:**

A variable-length integer specifying the byte offset in the stream for the data in this CRYPTO frame.¶

**Length:**

A variable-length integer specifying the length of the Crypto Data field in this CRYPTO frame.¶

**Crypto Data:**

The cryptographic message data.¶

There is a separate flow of cryptographic handshake data in each encryption level, each of which starts at an offset of 0. This implies that each encryption level is treated as a separate CRYPTO stream of data.¶

The largest offset delivered on a stream -- the sum of the offset and data length -- cannot exceed 262-1. Receipt of a frame that exceeds this limit MUST be treated as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR or CRYPTO_BUFFER_EXCEEDED.¶

Unlike STREAM frames, which include a stream ID indicating to which stream the data belongs, the CRYPTO frame carries data for a single stream per encryption level. The stream does not have an explicit end, so CRYPTO frames do not have a FIN bit.¶

### 19.7. NEW_TOKEN Frames

A server sends a NEW_TOKEN frame (type=0x07) to provide the client with a token to send in the header of an Initial packet for a future connection.¶

NEW_TOKEN frames are formatted as shown in Figure 31.¶

```
NEW_TOKEN Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x07,
  Token Length (i),
  Token (..),
}
```

NEW_TOKEN frames contain the following fields:¶

**Token Length:**

A variable-length integer specifying the length of the token in bytes.¶

**Token:**

An opaque blob that the client can use with a future Initial packet. The token MUST NOT be empty. A client MUST treat receipt of a NEW_TOKEN frame with an empty Token field as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

A client might receive multiple NEW_TOKEN frames that contain the same token value if packets containing the frame are incorrectly determined to be lost. Clients are responsible for discarding duplicate values, which might be used to link connection attempts; see Section 8.1.3.¶

Clients MUST NOT send NEW_TOKEN frames. A server MUST treat receipt of a NEW_TOKEN frame as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

### 19.8. STREAM Frames

STREAM frames implicitly create a stream and carry stream data. The Type field in the STREAM frame takes the form 0b00001XXX (or the set of values from 0x08 to 0x0f). The three low-order bits of the frame type determine the fields that are present in the frame:¶

- The OFF bit (0x04) in the frame type is set to indicate that there is an Offset field present. When set to 1, the Offset field is present. When set to 0, the Offset field is absent and the Stream Data starts at an offset of 0 (that is, the frame contains the first bytes of the stream, or the end of a stream that includes no data).¶
- The LEN bit (0x02) in the frame type is set to indicate that there is a Length field present. If this bit is set to 0, the Length field is absent and the Stream Data field extends to the end of the packet. If this bit is set to 1, the Length field is present.¶
- The FIN bit (0x01) indicates that the frame marks the end of the stream. The final size of the stream is the sum of the offset and the length of this frame.¶

An endpoint MUST terminate the connection with error STREAM_STATE_ERROR if it receives a STREAM frame for a locally initiated stream that has not yet been created, or for a send-only stream.¶

STREAM frames are formatted as shown in Figure 32.¶

```
STREAM Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x08..0x0f,
  Stream ID (i),
  [Offset (i)],
  [Length (i)],
  Stream Data (..),
}
```

STREAM frames contain the following fields:¶

**Stream ID:**

A variable-length integer indicating the stream ID of the stream; see Section 2.1.¶

**Offset:**

A variable-length integer specifying the byte offset in the stream for the data in this STREAM frame. This field is present when the OFF bit is set to 1. When the Offset field is absent, the offset is 0.¶

**Length:**

A variable-length integer specifying the length of the Stream Data field in this STREAM frame. This field is present when the LEN bit is set to 1. When the LEN bit is set to 0, the Stream Data field consumes all the remaining bytes in the packet.¶

**Stream Data:**

The bytes from the designated stream to be delivered.¶

When a Stream Data field has a length of 0, the offset in the STREAM frame is the offset of the next byte that would be sent.¶

The first byte in the stream has an offset of 0. The largest offset delivered on a stream -- the sum of the offset and data length -- cannot exceed 262-1, as it is not possible to provide flow control credit for that data. Receipt of a frame that exceeds this limit MUST be treated as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR or FLOW_CONTROL_ERROR.¶

### 19.9. MAX_DATA Frames

A MAX_DATA frame (type=0x10) is used in flow control to inform the peer of the maximum amount of data that can be sent on the connection as a whole.¶

MAX_DATA frames are formatted as shown in Figure 33.¶

```
MAX_DATA Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x10,
  Maximum Data (i),
}
```

MAX_DATA frames contain the following field:¶

**Maximum Data:**

A variable-length integer indicating the maximum amount of data that can be sent on the entire connection, in units of bytes.¶

All data sent in STREAM frames counts toward this limit. The sum of the final sizes on all streams -- including streams in terminal states -- MUST NOT exceed the value advertised by a receiver. An endpoint MUST terminate a connection with an error of type FLOW_CONTROL_ERROR if it receives more data than the maximum data value that it has sent. This includes violations of remembered limits in Early Data; see Section 7.4.1.¶

### 19.10. MAX_STREAM_DATA Frames

A MAX_STREAM_DATA frame (type=0x11) is used in flow control to inform a peer of the maximum amount of data that can be sent on a stream.¶

A MAX_STREAM_DATA frame can be sent for streams in the "Recv" state; see Section 3.2. Receiving a MAX_STREAM_DATA frame for a locally initiated stream that has not yet been created MUST be treated as a connection error of type STREAM_STATE_ERROR. An endpoint that receives a MAX_STREAM_DATA frame for a receive-only stream MUST terminate the connection with error STREAM_STATE_ERROR.¶

MAX_STREAM_DATA frames are formatted as shown in Figure 34.¶

```
MAX_STREAM_DATA Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x11,
  Stream ID (i),
  Maximum Stream Data (i),
}
```

MAX_STREAM_DATA frames contain the following fields:¶

**Stream ID:**

The stream ID of the affected stream, encoded as a variable-length integer.¶

**Maximum Stream Data:**

A variable-length integer indicating the maximum amount of data that can be sent on the identified stream, in units of bytes.¶

When counting data toward this limit, an endpoint accounts for the largest received offset of data that is sent or received on the stream. Loss or reordering can mean that the largest received offset on a stream can be greater than the total size of data received on that stream. Receiving STREAM frames might not increase the largest received offset.¶

The data sent on a stream MUST NOT exceed the largest maximum stream data value advertised by the receiver. An endpoint MUST terminate a connection with an error of type FLOW_CONTROL_ERROR if it receives more data than the largest maximum stream data that it has sent for the affected stream. This includes violations of remembered limits in Early Data; see Section 7.4.1.¶

### 19.11. MAX_STREAMS Frames

A MAX_STREAMS frame (type=0x12 or 0x13) informs the peer of the cumulative number of streams of a given type it is permitted to open. A MAX_STREAMS frame with a type of 0x12 applies to bidirectional streams, and a MAX_STREAMS frame with a type of 0x13 applies to unidirectional streams.¶

MAX_STREAMS frames are formatted as shown in Figure 35.¶

```
MAX_STREAMS Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x12..0x13,
  Maximum Streams (i),
}
```

MAX_STREAMS frames contain the following field:¶

**Maximum Streams:**

A count of the cumulative number of streams of the corresponding type that can be opened over the lifetime of the connection. This value cannot exceed 260, as it is not possible to encode stream IDs larger than 262-1. Receipt of a frame that permits opening of a stream larger than this limit MUST be treated as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

Loss or reordering can cause an endpoint to receive a MAX_STREAMS frame with a lower stream limit than was previously received. MAX_STREAMS frames that do not increase the stream limit MUST be ignored.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT open more streams than permitted by the current stream limit set by its peer. For instance, a server that receives a unidirectional stream limit of 3 is permitted to open streams 3, 7, and 11, but not stream 15. An endpoint MUST terminate a connection with an error of type STREAM_LIMIT_ERROR if a peer opens more streams than was permitted. This includes violations of remembered limits in Early Data; see Section 7.4.1.¶

Note that these frames (and the corresponding transport parameters) do not describe the number of streams that can be opened concurrently. The limit includes streams that have been closed as well as those that are open.¶

### 19.12. DATA_BLOCKED Frames

A sender SHOULD send a DATA_BLOCKED frame (type=0x14) when it wishes to send data but is unable to do so due to connection-level flow control; see Section 4. DATA_BLOCKED frames can be used as input to tuning of flow control algorithms; see Section 4.2.¶

DATA_BLOCKED frames are formatted as shown in Figure 36.¶

```
DATA_BLOCKED Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x14,
  Maximum Data (i),
}
```

DATA_BLOCKED frames contain the following field:¶

**Maximum Data:**

A variable-length integer indicating the connection-level limit at which blocking occurred.¶

### 19.13. STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED Frames

A sender SHOULD send a STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frame (type=0x15) when it wishes to send data but is unable to do so due to stream-level flow control. This frame is analogous to DATA_BLOCKED (Section 19.12).¶

An endpoint that receives a STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frame for a send-only stream MUST terminate the connection with error STREAM_STATE_ERROR.¶

STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frames are formatted as shown in Figure 37.¶

```
STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x15,
  Stream ID (i),
  Maximum Stream Data (i),
}
```

STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frames contain the following fields:¶

**Stream ID:**

A variable-length integer indicating the stream that is blocked due to flow control.¶

**Maximum Stream Data:**

A variable-length integer indicating the offset of the stream at which the blocking occurred.¶

### 19.14. STREAMS_BLOCKED Frames

A sender SHOULD send a STREAMS_BLOCKED frame (type=0x16 or 0x17) when it wishes to open a stream but is unable to do so due to the maximum stream limit set by its peer; see Section 19.11. A STREAMS_BLOCKED frame of type 0x16 is used to indicate reaching the bidirectional stream limit, and a STREAMS_BLOCKED frame of type 0x17 is used to indicate reaching the unidirectional stream limit.¶

A STREAMS_BLOCKED frame does not open the stream, but informs the peer that a new stream was needed and the stream limit prevented the creation of the stream.¶

STREAMS_BLOCKED frames are formatted as shown in Figure 38.¶

```
STREAMS_BLOCKED Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x16..0x17,
  Maximum Streams (i),
}
```

STREAMS_BLOCKED frames contain the following field:¶

**Maximum Streams:**

A variable-length integer indicating the maximum number of streams allowed at the time the frame was sent. This value cannot exceed 260, as it is not possible to encode stream IDs larger than 262-1. Receipt of a frame that encodes a larger stream ID MUST be treated as a connection error of type STREAM_LIMIT_ERROR or FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

### 19.15. NEW_CONNECTION_ID Frames

An endpoint sends a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame (type=0x18) to provide its peer with alternative connection IDs that can be used to break linkability when migrating connections; see Section 9.5.¶

NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames are formatted as shown in Figure 39.¶

```
NEW_CONNECTION_ID Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x18,
  Sequence Number (i),
  Retire Prior To (i),
  Length (8),
  Connection ID (8..160),
  Stateless Reset Token (128),
}
```

NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames contain the following fields:¶

**Sequence Number:**

The sequence number assigned to the connection ID by the sender, encoded as a variable-length integer; see Section 5.1.1.¶

**Retire Prior To:**

A variable-length integer indicating which connection IDs should be retired; see Section 5.1.2.¶

**Length:**

An 8-bit unsigned integer containing the length of the connection ID. Values less than 1 and greater than 20 are invalid and MUST be treated as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

**Connection ID:**

A connection ID of the specified length.¶

**Stateless Reset Token:**

A 128-bit value that will be used for a stateless reset when the associated connection ID is used; see Section 10.3.¶

An endpoint MUST NOT send this frame if it currently requires that its peer send packets with a zero-length Destination Connection ID. Changing the length of a connection ID to or from zero length makes it difficult to identify when the value of the connection ID changed. An endpoint that is sending packets with a zero-length Destination Connection ID MUST treat receipt of a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

Transmission errors, timeouts, and retransmissions might cause the same NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame to be received multiple times. Receipt of the same frame multiple times MUST NOT be treated as a connection error. A receiver can use the sequence number supplied in the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame to handle receiving the same NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame multiple times.¶

If an endpoint receives a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame that repeats a previously issued connection ID with a different Stateless Reset Token field value or a different Sequence Number field value, or if a sequence number is used for different connection IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

The Retire Prior To field applies to connection IDs established during connection setup and the preferred_address transport parameter; see Section 5.1.2. The value in the Retire Prior To field MUST be less than or equal to the value in the Sequence Number field. Receiving a value in the Retire Prior To field that is greater than that in the Sequence Number field MUST be treated as a connection error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.¶

Once a sender indicates a Retire Prior To value, smaller values sent in subsequent NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames have no effect. A receiver MUST ignore any Retire Prior To fields that do not increase the largest received Retire Prior To value.¶

An endpoint that receives a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame with a sequence number smaller than the Retire Prior To field of a previously received NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame MUST send a corresponding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame that retires the newly received connection ID, unless it has already done so for that sequence number.¶

### 19.16. RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID Frames

An endpoint sends a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame (type=0x19) to indicate that it will no longer use a connection ID that was issued by its peer. This includes the connection ID provided during the handshake. Sending a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame also serves as a request to the peer to send additional connection IDs for future use; see Section 5.1. New connection IDs can be delivered to a peer using the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame (Section 19.15).¶

Retiring a connection ID invalidates the stateless reset token associated with that connection ID.¶

RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames are formatted as shown in Figure 40.¶

```
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x19,
  Sequence Number (i),
}
```

RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames contain the following field:¶

**Sequence Number:**

The sequence number of the connection ID being retired; see Section 5.1.2.¶

Receipt of a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame containing a sequence number greater than any previously sent to the peer MUST be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

The sequence number specified in a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame MUST NOT refer to the Destination Connection ID field of the packet in which the frame is contained. The peer MAY treat this as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

An endpoint cannot send this frame if it was provided with a zero-length connection ID by its peer. An endpoint that provides a zero-length connection ID MUST treat receipt of a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

### 19.17. PATH_CHALLENGE Frames

Endpoints can use PATH_CHALLENGE frames (type=0x1a) to check reachability to the peer and for path validation during connection migration.¶

PATH_CHALLENGE frames are formatted as shown in Figure 41.¶

```
PATH_CHALLENGE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x1a,
  Data (64),
}
```

PATH_CHALLENGE frames contain the following field:¶

**Data:**

This 8-byte field contains arbitrary data.¶

Including 64 bits of entropy in a PATH_CHALLENGE frame ensures that it is easier to receive the packet than it is to guess the value correctly.¶

The recipient of this frame MUST generate a PATH_RESPONSE frame (Section 19.18) containing the same Data value.¶

### 19.18. PATH_RESPONSE Frames

A PATH_RESPONSE frame (type=0x1b) is sent in response to a PATH_CHALLENGE frame.¶

PATH_RESPONSE frames are formatted as shown in Figure 42. The format of a PATH_RESPONSE frame is identical to that of the PATH_CHALLENGE frame; see Section 19.17.¶

```
PATH_RESPONSE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x1b,
  Data (64),
}
```

If the content of a PATH_RESPONSE frame does not match the content of a PATH_CHALLENGE frame previously sent by the endpoint, the endpoint MAY generate a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

### 19.19. CONNECTION_CLOSE Frames

An endpoint sends a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame (type=0x1c or 0x1d) to notify its peer that the connection is being closed. The CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a type of 0x1c is used to signal errors at only the QUIC layer, or the absence of errors (with the NO_ERROR code). The CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a type of 0x1d is used to signal an error with the application that uses QUIC.¶

If there are open streams that have not been explicitly closed, they are implicitly closed when the connection is closed.¶

CONNECTION_CLOSE frames are formatted as shown in Figure 43.¶

```
CONNECTION_CLOSE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x1c..0x1d,
  Error Code (i),
  [Frame Type (i)],
  Reason Phrase Length (i),
  Reason Phrase (..),
}
```

CONNECTION_CLOSE frames contain the following fields:¶

**Error Code:**

A variable-length integer that indicates the reason for closing this connection. A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame of type 0x1c uses codes from the space defined in Section 20.1. A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame of type 0x1d uses codes defined by the application protocol; see Section 20.2.¶

**Frame Type:**

A variable-length integer encoding the type of frame that triggered the error. A value of 0 (equivalent to the mention of the PADDING frame) is used when the frame type is unknown. The application-specific variant of CONNECTION_CLOSE (type 0x1d) does not include this field.¶

**Reason Phrase Length:**

A variable-length integer specifying the length of the reason phrase in bytes. Because a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame cannot be split between packets, any limits on packet size will also limit the space available for a reason phrase.¶

**Reason Phrase:**

Additional diagnostic information for the closure. This can be zero length if the sender chooses not to give details beyond the Error Code value. This SHOULD be a UTF-8 encoded string [RFC3629], though the frame does not carry information, such as language tags, that would aid comprehension by any entity other than the one that created the text.¶

The application-specific variant of CONNECTION_CLOSE (type 0x1d) can only be sent using 0-RTT or 1-RTT packets; see Section 12.5. When an application wishes to abandon a connection during the handshake, an endpoint can send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame (type 0x1c) with an error code of APPLICATION_ERROR in an Initial or Handshake packet.¶

### 19.20. HANDSHAKE_DONE Frames

The server uses a HANDSHAKE_DONE frame (type=0x1e) to signal confirmation of the handshake to the client.¶

HANDSHAKE_DONE frames are formatted as shown in Figure 44, which shows that HANDSHAKE_DONE frames have no content.¶

```
HANDSHAKE_DONE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x1e,
}
```

A HANDSHAKE_DONE frame can only be sent by the server. Servers MUST NOT send a HANDSHAKE_DONE frame before completing the handshake. A server MUST treat receipt of a HANDSHAKE_DONE frame as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.¶

### 19.21. Extension Frames

QUIC frames do not use a self-describing encoding. An endpoint therefore needs to understand the syntax of all frames before it can successfully process a packet. This allows for efficient encoding of frames, but it means that an endpoint cannot send a frame of a type that is unknown to its peer.¶

An extension to QUIC that wishes to use a new type of frame MUST first ensure that a peer is able to understand the frame. An endpoint can use a transport parameter to signal its willingness to receive extension frame types. One transport parameter can indicate support for one or more extension frame types.¶

Extensions that modify or replace core protocol functionality (including frame types) will be difficult to combine with other extensions that modify or replace the same functionality unless the behavior of the combination is explicitly defined. Such extensions SHOULD define their interaction with previously defined extensions modifying the same protocol components.¶

Extension frames MUST be congestion controlled and MUST cause an ACK frame to be sent. The exception is extension frames that replace or supplement the ACK frame. Extension frames are not included in flow control unless specified in the extension.¶

An IANA registry is used to manage the assignment of frame types; see Section 22.4.¶


## 20. Error Codes

QUIC transport error codes and application error codes are 62-bit unsigned integers.¶

### 20.1. Transport Error Codes

This section lists the defined QUIC transport error codes that can be used in a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a type of 0x1c. These errors apply to the entire connection.¶

**NO_ERROR (0x00):**

An endpoint uses this with CONNECTION_CLOSE to signal that the connection is being closed abruptly in the absence of any error.¶

**INTERNAL_ERROR (0x01):**

The endpoint encountered an internal error and cannot continue with the connection.¶

**CONNECTION_REFUSED (0x02):**

The server refused to accept a new connection.¶

**FLOW_CONTROL_ERROR (0x03):**

An endpoint received more data than it permitted in its advertised data limits; see Section 4.¶

**STREAM_LIMIT_ERROR (0x04):**

An endpoint received a frame for a stream identifier that exceeded its advertised stream limit for the corresponding stream type.¶

**STREAM_STATE_ERROR (0x05):**

An endpoint received a frame for a stream that was not in a state that permitted that frame; see Section 3.¶

**FINAL_SIZE_ERROR (0x06):**

(1) An endpoint received a STREAM frame containing data that exceeded the previously established final size, (2) an endpoint received a STREAM frame or a RESET_STREAM frame containing a final size that was lower than the size of stream data that was already received, or (3) an endpoint received a STREAM frame or a RESET_STREAM frame containing a different final size to the one already established.¶

**FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR (0x07):**

An endpoint received a frame that was badly formatted -- for instance, a frame of an unknown type or an ACK frame that has more acknowledgment ranges than the remainder of the packet could carry.¶

**TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR (0x08):**

An endpoint received transport parameters that were badly formatted, included an invalid value, omitted a mandatory transport parameter, included a forbidden transport parameter, or were otherwise in error.¶

**CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR (0x09):**

The number of connection IDs provided by the peer exceeds the advertised active_connection_id_limit.¶

**PROTOCOL_VIOLATION (0x0a):**

An endpoint detected an error with protocol compliance that was not covered by more specific error codes.¶

**INVALID_TOKEN (0x0b):**

A server received a client Initial that contained an invalid Token field.¶

**APPLICATION_ERROR (0x0c):**

The application or application protocol caused the connection to be closed.¶

**CRYPTO_BUFFER_EXCEEDED (0x0d):**

An endpoint has received more data in CRYPTO frames than it can buffer.¶

**KEY_UPDATE_ERROR (0x0e):**

An endpoint detected errors in performing key updates; see Section 6 of [QUIC-TLS].¶

**AEAD_LIMIT_REACHED (0x0f):**

An endpoint has reached the confidentiality or integrity limit for the AEAD algorithm used by the given connection.¶

**NO_VIABLE_PATH (0x10):**

An endpoint has determined that the network path is incapable of supporting QUIC. An endpoint is unlikely to receive a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame carrying this code except when the path does not support a large enough MTU.¶

**CRYPTO_ERROR (0x0100-0x01ff):**

The cryptographic handshake failed. A range of 256 values is reserved for carrying error codes specific to the cryptographic handshake that is used. Codes for errors occurring when TLS is used for the cryptographic handshake are described in Section 4.8 of [QUIC-TLS].¶

See Section 22.5 for details on registering new error codes.¶

In defining these error codes, several principles are applied. Error conditions that might require specific action on the part of a recipient are given unique codes. Errors that represent common conditions are given specific codes. Absent either of these conditions, error codes are used to identify a general function of the stack, like flow control or transport parameter handling. Finally, generic errors are provided for conditions where implementations are unable or unwilling to use more specific codes.¶

### 20.2. Application Protocol Error Codes

The management of application error codes is left to application protocols. Application protocol error codes are used for the RESET_STREAM frame (Section 19.4), the STOP_SENDING frame (Section 19.5), and the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with a type of 0x1d (Section 19.19).¶
