---
title: "C (programming language) (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_(programming_language)
domain: janet-language
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: janet language, lisp language, embeddable language, scripting language, s expression
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## Uses

C has been widely used to implement end-user and system-level applications.

### Rationale for use in systems programming

C is widely used for systems programming in implementing operating systems and embedded system applications. This is for several reasons:

- The C language permits platform hardware and memory to be accessed with pointers and type punning, so system-specific features (e.g. Control/Status Registers, I/O registers) can be configured and used with code written in C – it allows fullest control of the platform it is running on.
- The code generated by compilation does not demand many system features, and can be invoked from some boot code in a straightforward manner – it is simple to execute.
- The C language statements and expressions typically map well to sequences of instructions for the target processor, and consequently there is a low run-time demand on system resources – it is fast to execute.
- With its rich set of operators, the C language can use many of the features of target CPUs. Where a particular CPU has more esoteric instructions, a language variant can be constructed with perhaps intrinsic functions to exploit those instructions – it can use practically all the target CPU's features.
- The language makes it easy to overlay structures onto blocks of binary data, allowing the data to be comprehended, navigated and modified – it can write data structures, even file systems.
- The language supports a rich set of operators, including bit manipulation, for integer arithmetic and logic, and perhaps different sizes of floating point numbers – it can process appropriately structured data effectively.
- C is a fairly small language, with only a handful of statements, and without too many features that generate extensive target code – it is comprehensible.
- C has direct control over memory allocation and deallocation, which gives reasonable efficiency and predictable timing to memory-handling operations, without any concerns for sporadic *stop-the-world* garbage collection events – it has predictable performance.
- C permits the use and implementation of different memory allocation schemes, including a typical `malloc` and `free`; a more sophisticated mechanism with *arenas*; or a version for an OS kernel that may suit DMA, use within interrupt handlers, or integrated with the virtual memory system.
- Depending on the linker and environment, C code can also call libraries written in assembly language, and may be called from assembly language – it interoperates well with other lower-level code.
- C and its calling conventions and linker structures are commonly used in conjunction with other high-level languages, with calls both to C and from C supported – it interoperates well with other high-level code.
- C has a mature and broad ecosystem, including libraries, frameworks, open source compilers, debuggers and utilities, and is the de facto standard. It is likely the drivers already exist in C, or that there is a similar CPU architecture as a back-end of a C compiler, so there is reduced incentive to choose another language.

### Games

Computer games are often built from a combination of languages. C has featured significantly, especially for those games attempting to obtain best performance from computer platforms. Examples include Doom from 1993.

### World Wide Web

Historically, C was sometimes used for web development using the Common Gateway Interface (CGI) as a "gateway" for information between the web application, the server, and the browser. C may have been chosen over interpreted languages because of its speed, stability, and near-universal availability. It is no longer common practice for web development to be done in C, and many other web development languages are popular. Applications where C-based web development continues include the HTTP configuration pages on routers, IoT devices and similar, although even here some projects have parts in higher-level languages e.g. the use of Lua within OpenWRT.

Two popular web servers, Apache HTTP Server and Nginx, are written in C. C's close-to-the-metal approach allows for the construction of these high-performance software systems.

### C as an intermediate language

C is sometimes used as an intermediate language by implementations of other languages. This approach may be used for portability or convenience; by using C as an intermediate language, additional machine-specific code generators are not necessary. C has some features, such as line-number preprocessor directives and optional superfluous commas at the end of initializer lists, that support compilation of generated code. However, some of C's shortcomings have prompted the development of other C-based languages specifically designed for use as intermediate languages, such as C--. Also, contemporary major compilers GCC and LLVM both feature an intermediate representation that is not C, and those compilers support front ends for many languages including C.

### Computationally intensive libraries

C enables programmers to create efficient implementations of algorithms and data structures, because the layer of abstraction from hardware is thin, and its overhead is low, an important criterion for computationally intensive programs. For example, the GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library, the GNU Scientific Library, Mathematica, and MATLAB are completely or partially written in C. Many languages support calling library functions in C; for example, the Python-based framework NumPy uses C for the high-performance and hardware-interacting aspects.

### Other languages are written in C

A consequence of C's wide availability and efficiency is that compilers, libraries and interpreters of other programming languages are often implemented in C. For example, the reference implementations of Python, Perl, Ruby, and PHP are written in C.


## Limitations

Ritchie himself joked about the limitations of the language that he created:

> the power of assembly language and the convenience of ... assembly language

— Dennis Ritchie

While C is popular, influential and hugely successful, it has drawbacks, including:

- The standard dynamic memory handling with `malloc` and `free` is prone to mistakes. Improper use can lead to memory leaks and dangling pointers.
- The use of pointers and the direct manipulation of memory means corruption of memory is possible.
- There is type checking, yet it does not apply to some areas like variadic functions, and the type checking can be trivially or inadvertently circumvented. It is weakly typed, despite being statically typed.
- Since the code generated by the compiler contains few run-time checks, there is a burden on the programmer to consider all possible outcomes, to protect against buffer overruns, array bounds checking, stack overflows, memory exhaustion, and consider race conditions, thread isolation, etc.
- The use of pointers and the run-time manipulation of these enables two ways to access the same data (aliasing), which is not always determinable at compile time. This means that some optimizations that may be available to some other languages, such as Fortran, are not possible in C. For this reason, Fortran is sometimes considered faster.
- Some of the standard library functions, e.g. `scanf` or `strncat`, can lead to buffer overruns.
- There is limited standardization in support for low-level variants in generated code, such as different function calling conventions and ABIs; different structure packing conventions; and different byte ordering within larger integers (including endianness). In many language implementations, some of these options may be handled with the preprocessor directive `#pragma`, and some with additional keywords e.g. use `__cdecl` calling convention. The directive and options are not consistently supported.
- String handling using the standard library is code-intensive, with explicit memory management required.
- The language does not directly support object orientation, introspection, run-time expression evaluation (like `eval` in JavaScript), garbage collection, etc.
- There are few guards against misuse of language features, which may enable unmaintainable code. In particular, the C preprocessor can hide troubling effects such as double evaluation and worse. This capability for obfuscated code has been celebrated with competitions such as the International Obfuscated C Code Contest and the Underhanded C Contest.
- C lacks standard support for exception handling and only offers return codes for error checking. The `setjmp` and `longjmp` standard library functions have been used to implement a try-catch mechanism via macros. Also, `goto` statements are commonly used for error handling.

### Mitigations for C's problems

For some purposes, restricted styles of C have been adopted, e.g. MISRA C or CERT C, in an attempt to reduce the opportunity for unwanted behaviour. Databases such as CWE attempt to count the ways that systems in general, especially those coded in C, have potential vulnerabilities, along with recommendations for mitigation.

There are tools that can mitigate some of the drawbacks. Contemporary C compilers include checks which may generate warnings to help identify many potential bugs.

C's use of pointers can be made less risky by use of instruction set architecture extensions such as *CHERI* or *Permission Overlay Extensions*. These techniques change the fundamental nature of pointers at a hardware level to include bounds checks and purposes, which can help prevent buffer over-runs and inappropriate heap accesses.

Since the early 2020s the Linux kernel has sections written in Rust, a language which has specific measures to improve safety.

Many languages developed after C were influenced by and borrowed aspects of C, including C++, C#, C shell, D, Go, Java, JavaScript, Julia, Limbo, LPC, Objective-C, Perl, PHP, Python, Ruby, Rust, Swift, Verilog and SystemVerilog. Some claim that the most pervasive influence has been syntactical – that these languages combine the statement and expression syntax of C with type systems, data models and large-scale program structures that differ from those of C, sometimes radically.

Several C or near-C interpreters exist, including Ch and CINT, which can also be used for scripting.

When object-oriented programming languages became popular, C++ and Objective-C were two different extensions of C that provided object-oriented capabilities. Both languages were originally implemented as source-to-source compilers; source code was translated into C, and then compiled with a C compiler.

The C++ programming language (originally named "C with Classes") was devised by Bjarne Stroustrup as an approach to providing object-oriented functionality with a C-like syntax. C++ adds greater typing strength, scoping, and other tools useful in object-oriented programming, and permits generic programming via templates. Nearly a superset of C, C++ now supports most of C, with a few exceptions.

Objective-C was originally a thin layer on top of C, and remains a strict superset of C that permits object-oriented programming using a hybrid dynamic/static typing paradigm. Objective-C derives its syntax from both C and Smalltalk: syntax that involves preprocessing, expressions, function declarations, and function calls is inherited from C, while the syntax for object-oriented features was originally taken from Smalltalk.

In addition to C++ and Objective-C, Ch, Cilk, and Unified Parallel C are nearly supersets of C.
