---
title: "PHP: Function parameters and arguments"
source: https://www.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php
domain: php-manual
license: PHP-3.01 (docs CC-BY-3.0)
tags: php, php manual, php function, php script
fetched: 2026-07-02
---

# PHP: Function parameters and arguments

PHP 8.2.32 Released!

## Function parameters and arguments

The function parameters are declared in the function signature. Information may be passed to functions via the argument list, which is a comma-delimited list of expressions. The arguments are evaluated from left to right and the result is assigned to the parameters of the function, before the function is actually called (*eager* evaluation).

PHP supports passing arguments by value (the default), passing by reference, and default argument values. Variable-length argument lists and Named Arguments are also supported.

> **Note**:
> 
> As of PHP 7.3.0, it is possible to have a trailing comma in the argument list for a function calls:

As of PHP 8.0.0, the list of function parameters may include a trailing comma, which will be ignored. That is particularly useful in cases where the list of parameters is long or contains long variable names, making it convenient to list parameters vertically.

**Example #1 Function parameter list with trailing comma**

### Passing arguments by reference

By default, function arguments are passed by value (so that if the value of the argument within the function is changed, it does not get changed outside of the function). To allow a function to modify its arguments, they must be passed by reference.

To have an argument to a function always passed by reference, prepend an ampersand (&) to the parameter name in the function definition:

**Example #2 Passing function arguments by reference**

It is an error to pass a constant expression as an argument to a parameter that expects to be passed by reference.

### Default parameter values

A function may define default values for parameters using syntax similar to assigning a variable. The default is used only when the parameter's argument is not passed. Note that passing **`null`** does *not* assign the default value.

**Example #3 Use of default parameters in functions**

Default parameter values may be scalar values, arrays, the special type **`null`**, and as of PHP 8.1.0, objects using the new ClassName() syntax.

**Example #4 Using non-scalar types as default values**

**Example #5 Using objects as default values (as of PHP 8.1.0)**

The default value must be a constant expression, not (for example) a variable, a class member or a function call.

Note that any optional parameters should be specified after any required parameters, otherwise they cannot be omitted from calls. Consider the following example:

**Example #6 Incorrect usage of default function parameters**

Now, compare the above with this:

**Example #7 Correct usage of default function parameters**

As of PHP 8.0.0, named arguments can be used to skip over multiple optional parameters.

**Example #8 Correct usage of default function parameters**

As of PHP 8.0.0, declaring mandatory parameters after optional parameters is *deprecated*. This can generally be resolved by dropping the default value, since it will never be used. One exception to this rule are parameters of the form `Type $param = null`, where the **`null`** default makes the type implicitly nullable. This usage is deprecated as of PHP 8.4.0, and an explicit nullable type should be used instead. **Example #9 Declaring optional parameters after mandatory parameters**

> **Note**: As of PHP 7.1.0, omitting a parameter which does not specify a default throws an ArgumentCountError; in previous versions it raised a Warning.

> **Note**: Parameters that expect the argument by reference may have a default value.

### Variable-length argument lists

PHP has support for variable-length argument lists in user-defined functions by using the `...` token.

Parameter lists may include the `...` token to denote that the function accepts a variable number of arguments. The arguments will be passed into the given variable as an array: **Example #10 Using `...` to access variable arguments**

`...` can also be used when calling functions to unpack an array or Traversable variable or literal into the argument list: **Example #11 Using `...` to provide arguments**

You may specify normal positional parameters before the `...` token. In this case, only the trailing arguments that don't match a positional argument will be added to the array generated by `...`.

It is also possible to add a type declaration before the `...` token. If this is present, then all arguments captured by `...` must match that parameter type. **Example #12 Type declared variable arguments**

Finally, variable arguments can also be passed by reference by prefixing the `...` with an ampersand (`&`).

### Named Arguments

PHP 8.0.0 introduced named arguments as an extension of the existing positional parameters. Named arguments allow passing arguments to a function based on the parameter name, rather than the parameter position. This makes the meaning of the argument self-documenting, makes the arguments order-independent and allows skipping default values arbitrarily.

Named arguments are passed by prefixing the value with the parameter name followed by a colon. Using reserved keywords as parameter names is allowed. The parameter name must be an identifier, specifying dynamically is not allowed.

**Example #13 Named argument syntax**

**Example #14 Positional arguments versus named arguments**

The order in which the named arguments are passed does not matter.

**Example #15 Same example as above with a different order of parameters**

Named arguments can be combined with positional arguments. In this case, the named arguments must come after the positional arguments. It is also possible to specify only some of the optional arguments of a function, regardless of their order.

**Example #16 Combining named arguments with positional arguments**

Passing an argument to the same named parameter multiple times results in an Error exception.

**Example #17 Error thrown when passing an argument to the same named parameter multiple times**

As of PHP 8.1.0, it is possible to use named arguments after unpacking the arguments. A named argument *must not* override an already unpacked argument.

**Example #18 Use named arguments after unpacking**

### Found A Problem?

＋

add a note

### User Contributed Notes 9 notes

up

down

138

php at richardneill dot org

¶

11 years ago

```
To experiment on performance of pass-by-reference and pass-by-value, I used this  script. Conclusions are below. 

#!/usr/bin/php
<?php
function sum($array,$max){   $sum=0;
    for ($i=0; $i<2; $i++){
        $sum += $array[$i];  
    }
    return ($sum);
}

$max = 1E7                  $data = range(0,$max,1);

$start = microtime(true);
for ($x = 0 ; $x < 100; $x++){
    $sum = sum($data, $max);
}
$end =  microtime(true);
echo "Time: ".($end - $start)." s\n";

?>
```

up

down

14

Simmo at 9000 dot 000

¶

4 years ago

```
For anyone just getting started with php or searching, for an understanding, on what this page describes as a "... token" in Variable-length arguments:
https://www.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.variable-arg-list
<?php

  func($a, ...$b) 

?>
The 3 dots, or elipsis, or "...", or dot dot dot is sometimes called the "spread operator" in other languages.

As this is only used in function arguments, it is probably not technically an true operator in PHP.  (As of 8.1 at least?).

(With having an difficult to search for name like "... token", I hope this note helps someone).
```

up

down

33

gabriel at figdice dot org

¶

9 years ago

```
A function's argument that is an object, will have its properties modified by the function although you don't need to pass it by reference.

<?php
$x = new stdClass();
$x->prop = 1;

function f ( $o ) {
  $o->prop ++;
}

f($x);

echo $x->prop; ?>

This is different for arrays:

<?php
$y = [ 'prop' => 1 ];

function g( $a )
{
  $a['prop'] ++;
  echo $a['prop'];  }

g($y);

echo $y['prop'];  ?>
```

up

down

15

LilyWhite

¶

4 years ago

```
It is worth noting that you can use functions as function arguments

<?php
function run($op, $a, $b) {
  return $op($a, $b);
}

$add = function($a, $b) {
  return $a + $b;
};

$mul = function($a, $b) {
  return $a * $b;
};

echo run($add, 1, 2), "\n";
echo run($mul, 1, 2);
?>

Output:
3
2
```

up

down

19

boan dot web at outlook dot com

¶

8 years ago

```
Quote:

"The declaration can be made to accept NULL values if the default value of the parameter is set to NULL."

But you can do this (PHP 7.1+):

<?php
function foo(?string $bar) {
    }

foo(); foo(null); foo('Hello world'); ?>
```

up

down

15

Hayley Watson

¶

8 years ago

```
There are fewer restrictions on using ... to supply multiple arguments to a function call than there are on using it to declare a variadic parameter in the function declaration. In particular, it can be used more than once to unpack arguments, provided that all such uses come after any positional arguments.

<?php

$array1 = [[1],[2],[3]];
$array2 = [4];
$array3 = [[5],[6],[7]];

$result = array_merge(...$array1); $result = array_merge($array2, ...$array1); $result = array_merge(...$array1, $array2); $result = array_merge(...$array1, ...$array3); ?>

The Right Thing for the error case above would be for $result==[1,2,3,4], but this isn't yet (v7.1.8) supported.
```

up

down

3

Luna

¶

3 years ago

```
When using named arguments and adding default values only to some of the arguments, the arguments with default values must be specified at the end or otherwise PHP throws an error:

<?php

function test1($a, $c, $b = 2)
{
    return $a + $b + $c;
}

function test2($a, $b = 2, $c)
{
    return $a + $b + $c;
}

echo test1(a: 1, c: 3)."\n"; echo test2(a: 1, c: 3)."\n"; ?>

I assume that this happens because internally PHP rewrites the calls to something like test1(1, 3) and test2(1, , 3). The first call is valid, but the second obviously isn't.
```

up

down

5

Hayley Watson

¶

8 years ago

```
If you use ... in a function's parameter list, you can use it only once for obvious reasons. Less obvious is that it has to be on the LAST parameter; as the manual puts it: "You may specify normal positional arguments BEFORE the ... token. (emphasis mine).

<?php
function variadic($first, ...$most, $last)
{}

variadic(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
?>
results in a fatal error, even though it looks like the Thing To Do™ would be to set $first to 1, $most to [2, 3, 4], and $last to 5.
```

up

down

0

admin at monkacres dot se

¶

24 days ago

```
Remember, that you are not allowed to use reserved keywords as variable names. This might be a reason that your code isn't working.
```

＋

add a note
