---
title: "perlre (part 2/4)"
source: https://perldoc.perl.org/perlre
domain: perl-docs
license: GPL-1.0-or-later OR Artistic-1.0
tags: perl, perldoc, perl script, perl module, cpan
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/4
---

## #Regular Expressions

### #Quantifiers

Quantifiers are used when a particular portion of a pattern needs to match a certain number (or numbers) of times. If there isn't a quantifier the number of times to match is exactly one. The following standard quantifiers are recognized:

```
*           Match 0 or more times
+           Match 1 or more times
?           Match 1 or 0 times
{n}         Match exactly n times
{n,}        Match at least n times
{,n}        Match at most n times
{n,m}       Match at least n but not more than m times
```

(If a non-escaped curly bracket occurs in a context other than one of the quantifiers listed above, where it does not form part of a backslashed sequence like `\x{...}`, it is either a fatal syntax error, or treated as a regular character, generally with a deprecation warning raised. To escape it, you can precede it with a backslash (`"\{"`) or enclose it within square brackets (`"[{]"`). This change will allow for future syntax extensions (like making the lower bound of a quantifier optional), and better error checking of quantifiers).

The `"*"` quantifier is equivalent to `{0,}`, the `"+"` quantifier to `{1,}`, and the `"?"` quantifier to `{0,1}`. *n* and *m* are limited to non-negative integral values less than a preset limit defined when perl is built. This is usually 65534 on the most common platforms. The actual limit can be seen in the error message generated by code such as this:

```
$_ **= $_ , / {$_} / for 2 .. 42;
```

By default, a quantified subpattern is "greedy", that is, it will match as many times as possible (given a particular starting location) while still allowing the rest of the pattern to match. If you want it to match the minimum number of times possible, follow the quantifier with a `"?"`. Note that the meanings don't change, just the "greediness":

```
*?        Match 0 or more times, not greedily
+?        Match 1 or more times, not greedily
??        Match 0 or 1 time, not greedily
{n}?      Match exactly n times, not greedily (redundant)
{n,}?     Match at least n times, not greedily
{,n}?     Match at most n times, not greedily
{n,m}?    Match at least n but not more than m times, not greedily
```

Normally when a quantified subpattern does not allow the rest of the overall pattern to match, Perl will backtrack. However, this behaviour is sometimes undesirable. Thus Perl provides the "possessive" quantifier form as well.

```
*+     Match 0 or more times and give nothing back
++     Match 1 or more times and give nothing back
?+     Match 0 or 1 time and give nothing back
{n}+   Match exactly n times and give nothing back (redundant)
{n,}+  Match at least n times and give nothing back
{,n}+  Match at most n times and give nothing back
{n,m}+ Match at least n but not more than m times and give nothing back
```

For instance,

```
'aaaa' =~ /a++a/
```

will never match, as the `a++` will gobble up all the `"a"`'s in the string and won't leave any for the remaining part of the pattern. This feature can be extremely useful to give perl hints about where it shouldn't backtrack. For instance, the typical "match a double-quoted string" problem can be most efficiently performed when written as:

```
/"(?:[^"\\]++|\\.)*+"/
```

as we know that if the final quote does not match, backtracking will not help. See the independent subexpression `"(?>*pattern*)"` for more details; possessive quantifiers are just syntactic sugar for that construct. For instance the above example could also be written as follows:

```
/"(?>(?:(?>[^"\\]+)|\\.)*)"/
```

Note that the possessive quantifier modifier can not be combined with the non-greedy modifier. This is because it would make no sense. Consider the follow equivalency table:

```
Illegal         Legal
------------    ------
X??+            X{0}
X+?+            X{1}
X{min,max}?+    X{min}
```

### #Escape sequences

Because patterns are processed as double-quoted strings, the following also work:

```
\t          tab                   (HT, TAB)
\n          newline               (LF, NL)
\r          return                (CR)
\f          form feed             (FF)
\a          alarm (bell)          (BEL)
\e          escape (think troff)  (ESC)
\cK         control char          (example: VT)
\x{}, \x00  character whose ordinal is the given hexadecimal number
\N{name}    named Unicode character or character sequence
\N{U+263D}  Unicode character     (example: FIRST QUARTER MOON)
\o{}, \000  character whose ordinal is the given octal number
\l          lowercase next char (think vi)
\u          uppercase next char (think vi)
\L          lowercase until \E (think vi)
\U          uppercase until \E (think vi)
\Q          quote (disable) pattern metacharacters until \E
\E          end either case modification or quoted section, think vi
```

Details are in "Quote and Quote-like Operators" in perlop.

### #Character Classes and other Special Escapes

In addition, Perl defines the following:

```
Sequence   Note    Description
 [...]     [1]  Match a character according to the rules of the
                  bracketed character class defined by the "...".
                  Example: [a-z] matches "a" or "b" or "c" ... or "z"
 [[:...:]] [2]  Match a character according to the rules of the POSIX
                  character class "..." within the outer bracketed
                  character class.  Example: [[:upper:]] matches any
                  uppercase character.
 (?[...])  [8]  Extended bracketed character class
 \w        [3]  Match a "word" character (alphanumeric plus "_", plus
                  other connector punctuation chars plus Unicode
                  marks)
 \W        [3]  Match a non-"word" character
 \s        [3]  Match a whitespace character
 \S        [3]  Match a non-whitespace character
 \d        [3]  Match a decimal digit character
 \D        [3]  Match a non-digit character
 \pP       [3]  Match P, named property.  Use \p{Prop} for longer names
 \PP       [3]  Match non-P
 \X        [4]  Match Unicode "eXtended grapheme cluster"
 \1        [5]  Backreference to a specific capture group or buffer.
                  '1' may actually be any positive integer.
 \g1       [5]  Backreference to a specific or previous group,
 \g{-1}    [5]  The number may be negative indicating a relative
                  previous group and may optionally be wrapped in
                  curly brackets for safer parsing.
 \g{name}  [5]  Named backreference
 \k<name>  [5]  Named backreference
 \k'name'  [5]  Named backreference
 \k{name}  [5]  Named backreference
 \K        [6]  Keep the stuff left of the \K, don't include it in $&
 \N        [7]  Any character but \n.  Not affected by /s modifier
 \v        [3]  Vertical whitespace
 \V        [3]  Not vertical whitespace
 \h        [3]  Horizontal whitespace
 \H        [3]  Not horizontal whitespace
 \R        [4]  Linebreak
```

**#[1]**

See "Bracketed Character Classes" in perlrecharclass for details.

**#[2]**

See "POSIX Character Classes" in perlrecharclass for details.

**#[3]**

See "Unicode Character Properties" in perlunicode for details

**#[4]**

See "Misc" in perlrebackslash for details.

**#[5]**

See "Capture groups" below for details.

**#[6]**

See "Extended Patterns" below for details.

**#[7]**

Note that `\N` has two meanings. When of the form `\N{*NAME*}`, it matches the character or character sequence whose name is *NAME*; and similarly when of the form `\N{U+*hex*}`, it matches the character whose Unicode code point is *hex*. Otherwise it matches any character but `\n`.

**#[8]**

See "Extended Bracketed Character Classes" in perlrecharclass for details.

### #Assertions

Besides `"^"` and `"$"`, Perl defines the following zero-width assertions:

```
\b{}   Match at Unicode boundary of specified type
\B{}   Match where corresponding \b{} doesn't match
\b     Match a \w\W or \W\w boundary
\B     Match except at a \w\W or \W\w boundary
\A     Match only at beginning of string
\Z     Match only at end of string, or before newline at the end
\z     Match only at end of string
\G     Match only at pos() (e.g. at the end-of-match position
       of prior m//g)
```

A Unicode boundary (`\b{}`), available starting in v5.22, is a spot between two characters, or before the first character in the string, or after the final character in the string where certain criteria defined by Unicode are met. See "\b{}, \b, \B{}, \B" in perlrebackslash for details.

A word boundary (`\b`) is a spot between two characters that has a `\w` on one side of it and a `\W` on the other side of it (in either order), counting the imaginary characters off the beginning and end of the string as matching a `\W`. (Within character classes `\b` represents backspace rather than a word boundary, just as it normally does in any double-quoted string.) The `\A` and `\Z` are just like `"^"` and `"$"`, except that they won't match multiple times when the `/m` modifier is used, while `"^"` and `"$"` will match at every internal line boundary. To match the actual end of the string and not ignore an optional trailing newline, use `\z`.

The `\G` assertion can be used to chain global matches (using `m//g`), as described in "Regexp Quote-Like Operators" in perlop. It is also useful when writing `lex`-like scanners, when you have several patterns that you want to match against consequent substrings of your string; see the previous reference. The actual location where `\G` will match can also be influenced by using `pos()` as an lvalue: see "pos" in perlfunc. Note that the rule for zero-length matches (see "Repeated Patterns Matching a Zero-length Substring") is modified somewhat, in that contents to the left of `\G` are not counted when determining the length of the match. Thus the following will not match forever:

```
my $string = 'ABC';
pos($string) = 1;
while ($string =~ /(.\G)/g) {
    print $1;
}
```

It will print 'A' and then terminate, as it considers the match to be zero-width, and thus will not match at the same position twice in a row.

It is worth noting that `\G` improperly used can result in an infinite loop. Take care when using patterns that include `\G` in an alternation.

Note also that `s///` will refuse to overwrite part of a substitution that has already been replaced; so for example this will stop after the first iteration, rather than iterating its way backwards through the string:

```
$_ = "123456789";
pos = 6;
s/.(?=.\G)/X/g;
print; 	# prints 1234X6789, not XXXXX6789
```

### #Capture groups

The grouping construct `( ... )` creates capture groups (also referred to as capture buffers). To refer to the current contents of a group later on, within the same pattern, use `\g1` (or `\g{1}`) for the first, `\g2` (or `\g{2}`) for the second, and so on. This is called a *backreference*. There is no limit to the number of captured substrings that you may use. Groups are numbered with the leftmost open parenthesis being number 1, *etc*. If a group did not match, the associated backreference won't match either. (This can happen if the group is optional, or in a different branch of an alternation.) You can omit the `"g"`, and write `"\1"`, *etc*, but there are some issues with this form, described below.

You can also refer to capture groups relatively, by using a negative number, so that `\g-1` and `\g{-1}` both refer to the immediately preceding capture group, and `\g-2` and `\g{-2}` both refer to the group before it. For example:

```
/
 (Y)            # group 1
 (              # group 2
    (X)         # group 3
    \g{-1}      # backref to group 3
    \g{-3}      # backref to group 1
 )
/x
```

would match the same as `/(Y) ( (X) \g3 \g1 )/x`. This allows you to interpolate regexes into larger regexes and not have to worry about the capture groups being renumbered.

You can dispense with numbers altogether and create named capture groups. The notation is `(?<*name*>...)` to declare and `\g{*name*}` to reference. (To be compatible with .Net regular expressions, `\g{*name*}` may also be written as `\k{*name*}`, `\k<*name*>` or `\k'*name*'`.) *name* must not begin with a number, nor contain hyphens. When different groups within the same pattern have the same name, any reference to that name assumes the leftmost defined group. Named groups count in absolute and relative numbering, and so can also be referred to by those numbers. (It's possible to do things with named capture groups that would otherwise require `(??{})`.)

Capture group contents are dynamically scoped and available to you outside the pattern until the end of the enclosing block or until the next successful match in the same scope, whichever comes first. See "Compound Statements" in perlsyn and "Scoping Rules of Regex Variables" in perlvar for more details.

You can access the contents of a capture group by absolute number (using `"$1"` instead of `"\g1"`, *etc*); or by name via the `%+` hash, using `"$+{*name*}"`.

Braces are required in referring to named capture groups, but are optional for absolute or relative numbered ones. Braces are safer when creating a regex by concatenating smaller strings. For example if you have `qr/$x$y/`, and `$x` contained `"\g1"`, and `$y` contained `"37"`, you would get `/\g137/` which is probably not what you intended.

If you use braces, you may also optionally add any number of blank (space or tab) characters within but adjacent to the braces, like `\g{ -1 }`, or `\k{ *name* }`.

The `\g` and `\k` notations were introduced in Perl 5.10.0. Prior to that there were no named nor relative numbered capture groups. Absolute numbered groups were referred to using `\1`, `\2`, *etc*., and this notation is still accepted (and likely always will be). But it leads to some ambiguities if there are more than 9 capture groups, as `\10` could mean either the tenth capture group, or the character whose ordinal in octal is 010 (a backspace in ASCII). Perl resolves this ambiguity by interpreting `\10` as a backreference only if at least 10 left parentheses have opened before it. Likewise `\11` is a backreference only if at least 11 left parentheses have opened before it. And so on. `\1` through `\9` are always interpreted as backreferences. There are several examples below that illustrate these perils. You can avoid the ambiguity by always using `\g{}` or `\g` if you mean capturing groups; and for octal constants always using `\o{}`, or for `\077` and below, using 3 digits padded with leading zeros, since a leading zero implies an octal constant.

The `\*digit*` notation also works in certain circumstances outside the pattern. See "Warning on \1 Instead of $1" below for details.

Examples:

```
s/^([^ ]*) *([^ ]*)/$2 $1/;     # swap first two words

/(.)\g1/                        # find first doubled char
     and print "'$1' is the first doubled character\n";

/(?<char>.)\k<char>/            # ... a different way
     and print "'$+{char}' is the first doubled character\n";

/(?'char'.)\g1/                 # ... mix and match
     and print "'$1' is the first doubled character\n";

if (/Time: (..):(..):(..)/) {   # parse out values
    $hours = $1;
    $minutes = $2;
    $seconds = $3;
}

/(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)\g10/   # \g10 is a backreference
/(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)\10/    # \10 is octal
/((.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.))\10/  # \10 is a backreference
/((.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.)(.))\010/ # \010 is octal

$x = '(.)\1';        # Creates problems when concatenated.
$y = '(.)\g{1}';     # Avoids the problems.
"aa" =~ /${x}/;      # True
"aa" =~ /${y}/;      # True
"aa0" =~ /${x}0/;    # False!
"aa0" =~ /${y}0/;    # True
"aa\x08" =~ /${x}0/;  # True!
"aa\x08" =~ /${y}0/;  # False
```

Several special variables also refer back to portions of the previous match. `$+` returns whatever the last bracket match matched. `$&` returns the entire matched string. (At one point `$0` did also, but now it returns the name of the program.) $` returns everything before the matched string. `$'` returns everything after the matched string. And `$^N` contains whatever was matched by the most-recently closed group (submatch). `$^N` can be used in extended patterns (see below), for example to assign a submatch to a variable.

These special variables, like the `%+` hash and the numbered match variables (`$1`, `$2`, `$3`, *etc*.) are dynamically scoped until the end of the enclosing block or until the next successful match, whichever comes first. (See "Compound Statements" in perlsyn.)

The `@{^CAPTURE}` array may be used to access ALL of the capture buffers as an array without needing to know how many there are. For instance

```
$string=~/$pattern/ and @captured = @{^CAPTURE};
```

will place a copy of each capture variable, `$1`, `$2` etc, into the `@captured` array.

Be aware that when interpolating a subscript of the `@{^CAPTURE}` array you must use demarcated curly brace notation:

```
print "${^CAPTURE[0]}";
```

See "Demarcated variable names using braces" in perldata for more on this notation.

**NOTE**: Failed matches in Perl do not reset the match variables, which makes it easier to write code that tests for a series of more specific cases and remembers the best match.

**WARNING**: If your code is to run on Perl 5.16 or earlier, beware that once Perl sees that you need one of `$&`, $`, or `$'` anywhere in the program, it has to provide them for every pattern match. This may substantially slow your program.

Perl uses the same mechanism to produce `$1`, `$2`, *etc*, so you also pay a price for each pattern that contains capturing parentheses. (To avoid this cost while retaining the grouping behaviour, use the extended regular expression `(?: ... )` instead.) But if you never use `$&`, $` or `$'`, then patterns *without* capturing parentheses will not be penalized. So avoid `$&`, `$'`, and $` if you can, but if you can't (and some algorithms really appreciate them), once you've used them once, use them at will, because you've already paid the price.

Perl 5.16 introduced a slightly more efficient mechanism that notes separately whether each of $`, `$&`, and `$'` have been seen, and thus may only need to copy part of the string. Perl 5.20 introduced a much more efficient copy-on-write mechanism which eliminates any slowdown.

As another workaround for this problem, Perl 5.10.0 introduced `${^PREMATCH}`, `${^MATCH}` and `${^POSTMATCH}`, which are equivalent to $`, `$&` and `$'`, **except** that they are only guaranteed to be defined after a successful match that was executed with the `/p` (preserve) modifier. The use of these variables incurs no global performance penalty, unlike their punctuation character equivalents, however at the trade-off that you have to tell perl when you want to use them.


## #Quoting (escaping) metacharacters

To cause a metacharacter to match its literal self, you precede it with a backslash. Unlike some other regular expression languages, any sequence consisting of a backslash followed by a non-alphanumeric matches that non-alphanumeric, literally. So things like `\\`, `\(`, `\)`, `\[`, `\]`, `\{`, or `\}` are always interpreted as the literal character that follows the backslash.

(That's not true when an alphanumeric character is preceded by a backslash. There are a few such "escape sequences", like `\w`, which have special matching behaviors in Perl. All such are currently limited to ASCII-range alphanumerics.)

The best method to escape metacharacters is to use the `quotemeta()` function, or the equivalent, but the more flexible, and often more convenient, `\Q` metaquoting escape sequence

```
quotemeta $pattern;
```

This changes `$pattern` so that the metacharacters are quoted. You can then do

```
$string =~ s/$pattern/foo/;
```

and be assured that any metacharacters in `$pattern` will match their literal selves. If you instead use `\Q`, like:

```
$string =~ s/\Qpattern/foo/;
```

you don't have to have a separate `$pattern` variable. Further, there is an additional escape sequence, `\E` that can be combined with `\Q` to allow you to escape whatever portions of the pattern you desire:

```
$string =~ s/$unquoted\Q$quoted\E$unquoted/foo/;
```

Beware that if you put literal backslashes (those not inside interpolated variables) between `\Q` and `\E`, double-quotish backslash interpolation may lead to confusing results. If you *need* to use literal backslashes within `\Q...\E`, consult "Gory details of parsing quoted constructs" in perlop.

In older code, you may see something like this:

```
$pattern =~ s/(\W)/\\$1/g;
$string =~ s/$pattern/foo/;
```

This simply adds backslashes before all non-"word" characters to disable any special meanings they might have. (If `use locale` is in effect, the current locale can affect the results.) This paradigm is inadequate for Unicode.

`quotemeta()` and `\Q` are more fully described in "quotemeta" in perlfunc.
