---
title: "Abortion in the United States (part 1/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abortion_in_the_United_States
domain: federal-government-of-the-united-states
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: federal government of the united states
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 1/3
---

# Abortion in the United States

In the United States, abortion is a divisive issue in politics and culture wars. Prior to the mid-19th century, English common law formed the basis of abortion law in the colonies and the early Republic.

Connecticut was the first state to regulate abortion in 1821; it outlawed abortion after quickening, the moment in pregnancy when the pregnant woman starts to feel the fetus's movement in the uterus, and forbade the use of poisons to induce one post-quickening. Many states subsequently passed various laws on abortion until the Supreme Court of the United States decisions of *Roe v. Wade* and *Doe v. Bolton* decriminalized abortion nationwide in 1973. The *Roe* decision imposed a federally mandated uniform framework for state legislation on the subject. It also established a minimal period during which abortion is legal, with more or fewer restrictions throughout the pregnancy.

That basic framework, modified in *Planned Parenthood v. Casey* (1992), remained nominally in place, although the effective availability of abortion varied significantly from state to state, as many counties had no abortion providers. *Casey* held that a law could not place legal restrictions imposing an "undue burden" for "the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion of a nonviable fetus." In December 2021, the FDA legalized telemedicine provision of medication abortion pills with delivery by mail, but many states have laws which restrict this option.

In 2022, *Roe* and *Casey* were overturned in *Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization*, ending protection of abortion rights by the United States Constitution and allowing individual states to regulate any aspect of abortion not preempted by federal law. Since 1976, the Republican Party has generally sought to restrict abortion access based on the stage of pregnancy or to criminalize abortion, whereas the Democratic Party has generally defended access to abortion and has made contraception easier to obtain.

The abortion-rights movement advocates for patient choice and bodily autonomy, while the anti-abortion movement advocate that the fetus has a right to live. Historically framed as a debate between the pro-choice and pro-life labels, most Americans agree with some positions of each side. Support for abortion gradually increased in the U.S. beginning in the early 1970s, and stabilized during the 2010s. The abortion rate has continuously declined from a peak in 1980 of 30 per 1,000 women of childbearing age (15–44) to 11.3 by 2018. In 2018, 78% of abortions were performed at 9 weeks or less gestation, and 92% of abortions were performed at 13 weeks or less gestation. By 2023, medication abortions accounted for 63% of all abortions. Almost 25% of women will have had an abortion by age 45, with 20% of 30 year olds having had one. In 2019, 60% of women who had abortions were already mothers, and 50% already had two or more children. Increased access to birth control has been statistically linked to reductions in the abortion rate. The first state to decriminalize abortion prior to *Roe* was Hawaii.

As of 2025, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Illinois, Kansas, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, New York, Ohio, Vermont, and Wyoming have a right to abortion in their state constitutions, either explicitly or as interpreted by the state supreme court. Other states, such as Massachusetts and Oregon, protect abortion under state law. The state constitutions of Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Tennessee, and West Virginia explicitly contain no right to an abortion, while the state constitution of Nebraska prohibits abortion after the first trimester.


## Terminology

In medical parlance, "abortion" refers only to the end of an intrauterine pregnancy before the embryo or fetus can survive outside the uterus. This is inclusive of spontaneous abortion (more commonly referred to as miscarriage or early pregnancy loss) and to induced abortion, where a pregnancy is ended through medication or a medical procedure. The abortion debate most commonly relates to the induced abortion of a pregnancy, which is also how the term "abortion" is used in a legal sense.

Because abortion has been politicized, there has been a proliferation of ill-defined, inconsistently applied terms with no medical or clinical basis. Concepts like "late-term abortion", or "partial-birth abortion" are not medical terms and do not have clinical significance. Similarly, terms like "elective abortion" append unnecessary qualifiers that are not rooted in medical or legal distinctions. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends using the terms "induced abortion" or simply "abortion" instead. Additionally, some drugs that do not induce medical abortions, such as levonorgestrel, have been referred to as abortifacients by a US Senator.


## History

### Early history and rise of anti-abortion legislation

Abortion in what eventually became the United States was governed by English Common law, which held that abortion after quickening was murder. This was repeated by Henry de Bracton, Matthew Hale, and William Blackstone. The common law on abortions before quickening was varying.

Some historians argue that abortion was a fairly common practice in the history of the United States, and was not always controversial. At a time when society was more concerned with the more serious consequence of women becoming pregnant out of wedlock, family affairs were handled out of public view. Abortion did not become a public controversy until the health risk of unsafe abortions by (female) unlicensed practitioners was brought to the public attention in the 19th century. James Mohr wrote that even though pre-quickening abortion was legal in the first three decades of the 19th century, only 1 in 25 to 1 in 30 pregnancies ended in abortion. By the 1850s and 1860s, this number had increased to 1 in 5 or 1 in 6. John Keown highlighted some challenges in pinning down the common law view, observing that "evidence of quickening would clearly facilitate prosecution".

In the mid-18th century, Benjamin Franklin included a recipe for an abortifacient in a math textbook. In 1728, Franklin condemned publisher Samuel Keimer for publishing an article on abortion. According to biographer Walter Isaacson, Franklin did not have a strong view on the issue. In *The Speech of Polly Baker*, Franklin places the blame for abortion and infanticide on the sexual double standard against women. He stated:

> Forgive me Gentlemen, if I talk a little extravagantly on these Matters; I am no Divine: But if you, great Men, must be making Laws, do not turn natural and useful Actions into Crimes, by your Prohibitions. Reflect a little on the horrid Consequences of this Law in particular: What Numbers of procur'd Abortions! and how many distress'd Mothers have been driven, by the Terror of Punishment and public Shame, to imbrue, contrary to Nature, their own trembling Hands in the Blood of their helpless Offspring! Nature would have induc'd them to nurse it up with a Parent's Fondness. 'Tis the Law therefore, 'tis the Law itself that is guilty of all these Barbarities and Murders. Repeal it then, Gentlemen; let it be expung'd for ever from your Books: And on the other hand, take into your wise Consideration, the great and growing Number of Batchelors in the Country, many of whom, from the mean Fear of the Expense of a Family, have never sincerely and honourably Courted a Woman in their Lives; and by their Manner of Living, leave unproduced (which I think is little better than Murder) Hundreds of their Posterity to the Thousandth Generation. Is not theirs a greater Offence against the Public Good, than mine? Compel them then, by a Law, either to Marry, or pay double the Fine of Fornication every Year.

In 1716, New York passed an ordinance prohibiting midwives from providing abortion. Founding Father and Second President of the United States John Adams praised the Spartan lawgiver Lycurgus for refusing his sister-in-law from having an abortion even though it prevented him from assuming power. Thomas Jefferson wrote approving of a quote by Montesquieu that "‘there is among savages another custom . . . it is the cruel practice of abortion." Jefferson added that the Natives stopped the practice after becoming "civilized".

Within the context of a sex scandal, Connecticut became the first state to regulate abortion by statute in 1821. Many states subsequently passed various abortion laws. In 1829, New York made post-quickening abortions a felony and pre-quickening abortions a misdemeanor. This was followed by 10 of the 26 states creating similar restrictions within the next few decades, in particular by the 1860s and 1870s. The first laws related to abortion were made to protect women from real or perceived risks, and those more restrictive penalized only the provider. Criminalization did not end the practice of abortion; unlicensed doctors and midwives continued to perform them. Most of the women receiving abortions from unlicensed practitioners were poor. Women's safety continued to be a concern, especially after the highly publicized death of Mary Rogers. Wealthier women could pay willing physicians to broadly interpret health exceptions in their favor. Euphemistic advertisements for abortifacients offered an assortment of herbal remedies.

A number of other factors likely played a role in the rise of anti-abortion laws. As in Europe, abortion techniques advanced starting in the 17th century, and the conservatism of most in the medical profession with regards to sexual matters prevented the wide expansion of abortion techniques. Physicians, who were the leading advocates of abortion criminalization laws, appear to have been motivated at least in part by advances in medical knowledge. Science had discovered that fertilization inaugurated a more or less continuous process of development, which produced a new human being. Quickening was found to be not more or less crucial in the process of gestation than any other step. Many physicians concluded that if society considered it unjustifiable to terminate pregnancy after the fetus had quickened, and if quickening was a relatively unimportant step in the gestation process, then it was just as wrong to terminate a pregnancy before quickening as after quickening. Patricia Cline Cohen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, Santa Barbara, said that these laws had come about not because society saw abortion as a crime but from a small group of doctors who had taken it upon themselves to prove to the rest of the county that pre-quickening abortion should be seen as a crime. The doctors used flawed math to convince the American Medical Association to accept that pre-quickening abortion should also be outlawed, leading to the raft of state laws banning abortion in the latter half of the 19th century. Doctors were also influenced by practical reasons to advocate anti-abortion laws. For one, abortion providers were usually female midwives without formal training or education. In an age where the leading doctors in the nation were attempting to standardize the medical profession, these unlicensed practitioners were considered a nuisance to public health.

Despite campaigns to end the practice of abortion, abortifacient advertising was highly effective and abortion was commonly practiced, with the help of a midwife or other women, in the mid-19th century, although they were not always safe. While the precise abortion rate was not known, James Mohr's 1978 book *Abortion in America* documented multiple recorded estimates by 19th-century physicians, which suggested that between around 15% and 35% of all pregnancies ended in abortion during that period. This era also saw a marked shift in the people who were obtaining abortions. Before the start of the 19th century, most abortions were sought by unmarried women, who had become pregnant out of wedlock and for which there was much less compassion compared to married women who got an abortion; many of them were wealthy and paid well. Out of 54 abortion cases published in American medical journals between 1839 and 1880, over half were sought by married women, and well over 60% of the married women already had at least one child.

The sense that married women were now frequently obtaining abortions worried many conservative physicians, who were almost exclusively men. In the Reconstruction era, much of the blame was placed on the burgeoning women's rights movement. Although the medical profession expressed hostility toward feminism, many feminists of the era were also opposed to abortion. In *The Revolution*, a newspaper operated by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, an 1869 opinion piece was published arguing that instead of merely attempting to pass a law against abortion, the root cause must also be addressed. The writer stated that simply passing an anti-abortion law would be "only mowing off the top of the noxious weed, while the root remains. ... No matter what the motive, love of ease, or a desire to save from suffering the unborn innocent, the woman is awfully guilty who commits the deed. It will burden her conscience in life, it will burden her soul in death; But oh! thrice guilty is he who drove her to the desperation which impelled her to the crime." To many feminists of this era, abortion was regarded as an undesirable necessity forced upon women by thoughtless men. The free love wing of the feminist movement refused to advocate for abortion and treated the practice as an example of the hideous extremes to which modern marriage was driving women. Marital rape and the seduction of unmarried women were societal ills, which feminists believed caused the need to abort, as men did not respect women's right to abstinence. Feminist opposition to abortion was much less prevalent by the 20th century, and it was feminists and physicians who came to question anti-abortion laws and raise public interest in the 1960s.

In 1873, Anthony Comstock created the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice, an institution dedicated to supervising the morality of the public. Later that year, Comstock successfully influenced the United States Congress to pass the Comstock Law, which made it illegal to deliver through the U.S. mail any "obscene, lewd, or lascivious" material. It also prohibited producing or publishing information pertaining to the procurement of abortion, birth control, and venereal disease, including to medical students. The production, publication, importation, and distribution of such materials was suppressed under the Comstock Law as being obscene, and similar prohibitions were passed by 24 of the 37 states.

By 1900, abortion was normally a felony in every state. Some states included provisions allowing for abortion in limited circumstances, generally to protect the woman's health or to terminate pregnancies arising from rape or incest. Most Americans did not view abortion as a crime, and abortions continued to occur and became increasingly available. The American Birth Control League was founded by Margaret Sanger in 1921; it would become Planned Parenthood Federation of America in 1942. By the 1930s, licensed physicians performed an estimated 800,000 abortions a year.

### Unsafe abortions

In 1988, 17 year old Becky Bell died from an infection after an unsafe abortion. She lived in Indiana where parental consent was required to have a safe and legal abortion. Laurence H. Tribe wrote in *Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes* that Bell's best friend said that Becky considered an out-of-state abortion to get around Indiana's parental consent requirement. It is possible she performed the abortion herself. However it was done, Becky died from an infection that was probably caused by the procedure. Her parents publicly campaigned against parental consent laws after her death.

Rosie Jimenez died from sepsis in 1977 following an abortion procedure at the home of a midwife who was not licensed to perform abortions. She did not go to a licensed physician because the Hyde Amendment barring public Medicaid funding for abortions had gone into effect after surviving a statutory challenge in *Beal v. Doe* and an Equal Protection challenge in *Maher v. Roe*.

Dr. Abu Hayat was convicted by a Manhattan Court in 1993 for performing an illegal third trimester abortion at his clinic in Alphabet City. The doctor began the dilation and evacuation procedure which was not legal in the third trimester. The baby was born alive before the procedure could be completed. She was missing an arm that had been severed during the D&E.

Hayat argued that he was protected from criminal conviction by *Roe v. Wade* based on an argument that the baby had not yet been born when he attempted the procedure.

Another patient was forced to leave Hayat's clinic halfway through a procedure after Dr. Hayat demanded more money that her husband could not afford to pay. The patient nearly died and was treated at a local hospital for severe infection caused by pieces of dismembered fetus being left in her uterus. 17 year old Sophie McCoy died in 1990 from an infected uterine perforation after receiving an abortion at Dr. Hayat's clinic.

Inequality in access to safe and legal abortions persists to this day whereby many women cannot afford to obtain a legal abortion; in such cases, women may turn to illegal abortion.

### Sherri Finkbine

In the early 1960s, a controversy centered around children's television host Sherri Finkbine that helped bring abortion and abortion law more directly into the American public eye. Living in the area of Phoenix, Arizona, Finkbine had had four healthy children; during her pregnancy with her fifth child, she discovered the child might have severe deformities when born. This was likely because Finkbine had been taking sleeping pills that she was unaware contained thalidomide, a drug that increases the risk of fetal deformities during pregnancy. Though Finkbine wanted an abortion, the abortion laws of Arizona only allowed abortions if a pregnancy posed a threat to the woman's life. The situation gained public attention after Finkbine shared the story with a reporter from *The Arizona Republic*, who disclosed her identity in spite of her requests for anonymity. On August 18, 1962, Finkbine traveled to Sweden to obtain a legal abortion, where it was confirmed that the fetus had severe deformities.

### Pre-*Roe* precedents

In 1964, Gerri Santoro of Connecticut died trying to obtain an illegal abortion, and her photo became the symbol of an abortion-rights movement. Some women's rights activist groups developed their own skills to provide abortions to women who could not obtain them elsewhere. As an example, in Chicago, a group known as "Jane" operated a floating abortion clinic throughout much of the 1960s. Women seeking the procedure would call a designated number and be given instructions on how to find "Jane".

In 1965, the U.S. Supreme Court case *Griswold v. Connecticut* struck down one of the remaining contraception Comstock laws in Connecticut and Massachusetts. However, *Griswold* only applied to marital relationships, allowing married couples to buy and use contraceptives without government restriction. It took until 1972, with *Eisenstadt v. Baird*, to extend the precedent of *Griswold* to unmarried persons as well. Following the *Griswold* case, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) issued a medical bulletin accepting a recommendation from six years earlier that clarified that "conception is the implantation of a fertilized ovum", and consequently birth control methods that prevented implantation became classified as contraceptives, not abortifacients.

In 1967, Colorado became the first state to decriminalize abortion in cases of rape, incest, or in which pregnancy would lead to permanent physical disability of the woman. Similar laws were passed in California, Oregon, and North Carolina. In 1970, Hawaii became the first state to legalize abortions on the request of the woman, and New York repealed its 1830 law and allowed abortions up to the 24th week of pregnancy. Similar laws were soon passed in Alaska and Washington. In 1970, Washington held a referendum on legalizing early pregnancy abortions, becoming the first state to legalize abortion through a vote of the people. A law in Washington, D.C., which allowed abortion to protect the life or health of the woman, was challenged in the Supreme Court in 1971 in *United States v. Vuitch*. The court upheld the law, deeming that "health" meant "psychological and physical well-being", essentially allowing abortion in Washington, D.C. By the end of 1972, 13 states had a law similar to that of Colorado, while Mississippi allowed abortion in cases of rape or incest only and Alabama and Massachusetts allowed abortions only in cases where the woman's physical health was endangered. In order to obtain abortions during this period, women would often travel from a state where abortion was illegal to one where it was legal. The legal position prior to *Roe v. Wade* was that abortion was illegal in 30 states and legal under certain circumstances in 20 states.

### *Roe v. Wade*

Prior to *Roe v. Wade*, 30 states prohibited abortion without exception, 16 states banned abortion except in certain special circumstances (e.g. rape, incest, and health threat to mother), 3 states allowed residents to obtain abortions, and New York allowed abortions generally. Early that year, on January 22, 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court in *Roe v. Wade* invalidated all of these laws, and set guidelines for the availability of abortion. The decision returned abortion to its liberalized pre-1820 status. *Roe* established that the right of privacy of a woman to obtain an abortion "must be considered against important state interests in regulation". *Roe* also established a trimester framework, defined as the end of the first pregnancy trimester (12 weeks), as the threshold for state interest, such that states were prohibited from banning abortion in the first trimester but allowed to impose increasing restrictions or outright bans later in pregnancy.

In deciding *Roe v. Wade*, the Court ruled that a Texas statute forbidding abortion except when necessary to save the life of the mother was unconstitutional. The Court arrived at its decision by concluding that the issue of abortion and abortion rights falls under the right of privacy in the United States (e.g. federal constitutionally-protected right), in the sense of the right of a person not to be encroached by the state. In its opinion, it listed several landmark cases where the court had previously found a right to privacy implied by the Constitution. The Court did not recognize a right to abortion in all cases, saying: "State regulation protective of fetal life after viability thus has both logical and biological justifications. If the State is interested in protecting fetal life after viability, it may go so far as to proscribe abortion during that period, except when it is necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother."

The Court held that a right to privacy existed and included the right to have an abortion. The court found that a mother had a right to abortion until viability, a point to be determined by the abortion doctor. After viability a woman can obtain an abortion for health reasons, which the Court defined broadly to include psychological well-being. A central issue in the *Roe* case and in the wider abortion debate in general is whether human life or personhood begins at conception, birth, or at some point in between. The Court declined to make an attempt at resolving this issue, writing: "We need not resolve the difficult question of when life begins. When those trained in the respective disciplines of medicine, philosophy, and theology are unable to arrive at any consensus, the judiciary, at this point in the development of man's knowledge, is not in a position to speculate as to the answer." Instead, it chose to point out that historically, under English and American common law and statutes, "the unborn have never been recognized ... as persons in the whole sense", and thus the fetuses are not legally entitled to the protection afforded by the right to life specifically enumerated in the Fourteenth Amendment. Rather than asserting that human life begins at any specific point, the Court declared that the state has a "compelling interest" in protecting "potential life" at the point of viability.

#### *Doe v. Bolton*

Under *Roe v. Wade*, state governments may not prohibit late terminations of pregnancy when "necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother", even if it would cause the demise of a viable fetus. This rule was clarified by the 1973 judicial decision *Doe v. Bolton*, which specifies "that the medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors—physical, emotional, psychological, familial, and the woman's age—relevant to the well-being of the patient". It is by this provision for the mother's mental health that women in the U.S. legally choose abortion after viability when screenings reveal abnormalities that do not cause a baby to die shortly after birth.

### Religious response to legalization of abortion

In the late 1960s, a number of organizations were formed to mobilize opinion both against and for the legalization of abortion. In 1966, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops assigned Monsignor James T. McHugh to document efforts to reform abortion laws, and anti-abortion groups began forming in various states in 1967. In 1968, McHugh led an advisory group which became the National Right to Life Committee. The forerunner of the NARAL Pro-Choice America was formed in 1969 to oppose restrictions on abortion and expand access to abortion. Following *Roe v. Wade*, in late 1973, NARAL became the National Abortion Rights Action League. Evangelical Christians were initially generally either supportive or indifferent to *Roe* — citing what they saw as a lack of biblical condemnation on the matter, its perceived affirmation of religious liberty, and furthering of non-intrusive government — but by the 1980s began to join anti-abortion Catholics to overturn the decision.

### *Planned Parenthood v. Casey*

In the 1992 case of *Planned Parenthood v. Casey*, the Court abandoned *Roe's* strict trimester framework but maintained its central holding that women have a right to choose to have an abortion before viability. *Roe* had held that statutes regulating abortion must be subject to "strict scrutiny"—the traditional Supreme Court test for impositions upon fundamental Constitutional rights. *Casey* instead adopted the lower, undue burden standard for evaluating state abortion restrictions, but re-emphasized the right to abortion as grounded in the general sense of liberty and privacy protected under the constitution: "Constitutional protection of the woman's decision to terminate her pregnancy derives from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. It declares that no state shall "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." The controlling word in the cases before us is 'liberty'."

The Supreme Court continues to make decisions on this subject. On April 18, 2007, it issued a ruling in the case of *Gonzales v. Carhart*, involving a federal law entitled the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 which President George W. Bush had signed into law. The law banned intact dilation and extraction, which opponents of abortion rights referred to as "partial-birth abortion", and stipulated that anyone breaking the law would get a prison sentence up to 2.5 years. The United States Supreme Court upheld the 2003 ban by a narrow majority of 5–4, marking the first time the Court has allowed a ban on any type of abortion since 1973. The opinion, which came from justice Anthony Kennedy, was joined by Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, and the two recent appointees, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts.

In the case of *Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt*, the Supreme Court in a 5–3 decision on June 27, 2016, swept away forms of state restrictions on the way abortion clinics can function. The Texas legislature enacted in 2013 restrictions on the delivery of abortions services that, it was argued by its opponents, created an undue burden for women seeking an abortion by requiring abortion doctors to have difficult-to-obtain "admitting privileges" at a local hospital and by requiring clinics to have costly hospital-grade facilities. The Court supported this argument and struck down these two provisions "facially" from the law at issue—that is, the very words of the provisions were invalid, no matter how they might be applied in any practical situation. According to the Supreme Court, the task of judging whether a law puts an unconstitutional burden on a woman's right to abortion belongs with the courts, and not the legislatures.

The Supreme Court ruled similarly in *June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo* on June 29, 2020, in a 5–4 decision that a Louisiana state law, modeled after the Texas law at the center of *Whole Woman's Health*, was unconstitutional. Like Texas' law, the Louisiana law required certain measures for abortion clinics that, if having gone into effect, would have closed five of the six clinics in the state. The case in Louisiana was put on hold pending the result of *Whole Woman's Health*, and was retried based on the Supreme Court's decision. While the District Court ruled the law unconstitutional, the Fifth Circuit found that unlike the Texas law, the burden of the Louisiana law passed the tests outlined in *Whole Woman's Health*, and thus the law was constitutional. The Supreme Court issued an order to suspend enforcement of the law pending further review, and agreed to hear the case in full in October 2019. It was the first abortion-related case to be heard by President Donald Trump's appointees to the Court, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. The Supreme Court found the Louisiana law unconstitutional for the same reasons as the Texas one, reversing the Fifth Circuit. The judgment was supported by Chief Justice John Roberts who had dissented on *Whole Woman's Health* but joined in judgment as to upholding the court's respect for the past judgment in that case.

### Federal provision for telemedical abortions

In December 2021, the FDA legalized telemedical provision of abortion pills with delivery by mail, after finding this to be safe and effective, and having suspended enforcement of previous restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic. As of June that year, 31 states allowed the practice, fourteen required the prescribing clinician to be physically present, which effectively banned telemedicine, and five explicitly banned telemedical abortion.

### *Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization*

The Supreme Court granted *certiorari* to *Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization* in May 2021, a case that challenges the impact of *Roe v. Wade* in blocking enforcement of a 2018 Mississippi law (the Gestational Age Act) that had banned any abortions after the first 15 weeks. Oral arguments to *Dobbs* were held in December 2021, and a decision was expected by the end of the 2021–22 Supreme Court term. On September 1, 2021, Texas passed the Texas Heartbeat Act, one of the most restrictive abortion laws in the nation, banning most procedures after six weeks. On May 2, 2022, a leaked draft majority opinion for *Dobbs*, written by Samuel Alito, set to overturn *Roe* was reported by *Politico*.

On June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court overruled both *Roe* and *Planned Parenthood v. Casey* in the *Dobbs* case on originalist grounds that a right to abortion cannot be found in the U.S. Constitution. John Roberts, the Chief Justice of the United States, concurred in the decision to uphold the law at question as constitutional, by a 6–3 vote, but did not support overruling both *Roe* and *Casey*. This enabled trigger laws, which had been passed in 13 states, to ban abortions in those states.

Abortion-related initiatives were placed on the 2022 ballot in six states, as 2022 California Proposition 1, 2022 Michigan Proposal 3, and 2022 Vermont Proposal 5 enshrined the right to an abortion in state constitutions, while the 2022 Kansas abortion referendum, 2022 Kentucky Amendment 2, and Montana Legislative Referendum No. 131 rejected restrictions on abortion. Voters in Ohio defeated August 2023 Ohio Issue 1, which intended to make changes to the state's constitution more difficult. November 2023 Ohio Issue 1 was then approved by a majority of voters, which added the right to an abortion to the Ohio constitution.

*FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine* brought into question the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)'s approval and rules around mifepristone, after lower courts had deemed the FDA's approval unlawful. In Arizona, the state Supreme Court ruled in *Planned Parenthood Arizona v. Mayes* that instead of a 15-week ban on abortion passed by the state in 2022, that the state should follow a 1902 law, based on a pre-ratification 1864 law, that disallowed nearly any abortion except in the case of a medical emergency, though the state government repealed the 1902 law in May 2024 to allow the 2022 law to take precedence. Some Republicans, including allies of presidential candidate Donald Trump, have pushed Project 2025, a sweeping government reform plan that includes banning abortions at a federal level as well as access to medical abortions drugs. Democrats used the pushback against these Republican and conservative anti-abortion goals as a point of campaigning for the election.

Although states nominally allow abortion to prevent the woman's imminent death, five women have died to pregnancy related issues in Texas alone due to doctors refusing to perform abortions because of the state's abortion law despite the *de jure* legal circumstances.

Abortion-related issues were a topic in the 2024 United States elections, including these referendums: 2024 Arizona Proposition 139, 2024 Colorado Amendment 79, 2024 Florida Amendment 4, 2024 Montana Initiative 128, 2024 Maryland Question 1, 2024 Missouri Amendment 3, 2024 New York Proposal 1, 2024 Nebraska Initiative 439, 2024 Nevada Question 6, and 2024 South Dakota Amendment G.

In 2026, 2024 Nevada Question 6 needs to be approved again to enshrine abortion in the state's constitution, while legislators in Hawaii, Virginia, and the state of Washington proposed similar amendments to codify abortion rights in 2026.


## Fetal homicide laws

Gerardo Flores was convicted of two counts of capital murder in 2005 under Texas' fetal homicide law. His girlfriend Erica Basoria testified that she had asked him to step on her stomach because her attempts to induce miscarriage on herself had been unsuccessful. Flores said he initially refused but she would not relent until he agreed. Flores admitted to police that he "accidentally, probably" hit Basoria in the face during a fight on the night of the miscarriage. Basoria told police that he was not abusive. Texas' fetal homicide law did not allow charges against the mother because she had a right to terminate pregnancy, so only Flores was charged.

In 2019 a woman in Alabama was indicted after she was shot in the stomach for intentionally causing the death of "unborn baby Jones by initiating a fight knowing she was five months pregnant". The charges were later dropped.


## Medical abortion and telemedical access

Medical abortion via mifepristone and misoprostol was approved for abortion in the United States by the FDA in September 2000. As of 2007, it was legal and available in all 50 states, Washington, D.C., Guam, and Puerto Rico. It is a prescription drug, but was not initially available to the public through pharmacies; its distribution is primarily restricted to specially qualified licensed physicians, sold by Danco Laboratories under the brand name Mifeprex.

### History

French pharmaceutical company Roussel-Uclaf, (the company that synthesized mifepristone in 1980 and took it through clinical trials for approval in France by 1988) did not seek US approval, so in the United States legal availability was not initially possible. The United States banned importation of mifepristone for personal use in 1989, a decision supported by Roussel Uclaf. In 1994, Roussel Uclaf gave the U.S. drug rights to the Population Council in exchange for immunity from any product liability claims. The Population Council sponsored clinical trials in the United States. The drug went on approvable status from 1996. Production was intended to begin through the Danco Group in 1996, but they withdrew briefly in 1997 due to a corrupt business partner, delaying availability again. Mifepristone was approved for abortion in the United States by the FDA in September 2000.

In 2016, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved mifepristone, to end a pregnancy through 70 days gestation (70 days or less since the first day of a woman's last menstrual period). The approved dosing regimen is 200 mg of mifepristone taken by mouth (swallowed). 24 to 48 hours after taking mifepristone, 800 mcg (micrograms) of misoprostol is taken buccally (in the cheek pouch), at a location appropriate for the patient.

As of September 2021, in 32 states, the drug could only be provided by a licensed physician, and in 19 states, the prescribing clinician was required to be physically in the room with the patient while they are taking the drug.

In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic on December 16, 2021, in light of the difficulties in accessing in-person healthcare services, the FDA approved the distribution of mifepristone via mail. In states where abortion is banned or restricted, women are able to obtain pills through ordering from overseas online pharmacies, purchasing from pharmacies in Mexico, from services such as Aid Access, or through a network of U.S.-Mexico border organizations that includes Red Necesito Abortar, Las Libres, and Marea Verde.

On 16 December 2021, the FDA voluntarily adopted a new rule permanently relaxing the requirement that the pill be obtained in person, allowing it to be sent through the mail. A prescription is still required, so that a doctor can screen for risk factors that would make taking the pill unsafe for the mother. In January 2023, the FDA further relaxed rules, allowing any retail pharmacy to become certified to fill mifepristone prescriptions.

In January 2023, the U.S. Department of Justice stated that USPS mailing of pills for medication abortion, even into states where abortion services are restricted, does not violate federal law. In 2023, online access to abortion medication by mail delivered by the U.S. Postal Service is currently available to citizens of all states.

In light of the *Dobbs* decision, the Alliance Defending Freedom launched a lawsuit in November 2022 in the Northern District of Texas under Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk to seek to overturn the FDA's original approval of mifepristone. The Alliance argued that the FDA had ignored some studies that showed the medication to have harmful side effects, while the current federal administration under Joe Biden, the manufacturers of the drugs, and several doctors vouched for the safety of the drugs and argued that the plaintiffs lacked standing. Judge Kacsmaryk ruled for the Alliance on April 7, 2023, reversing the FDA's approval and banning mifepristone across the United States after seven days. A district judge in a separate lawsuit, Thomas O. Rice of the Eastern District of Washington, ruled that the FDA should not reverse access to mifepristone in 16 states. Kacsmaryk's ruling was partially reversed by a panel on the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, leaving mifepristone on the market but reverting efforts made by the FDA to liberalize its use over seven years. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court, and on June 13, 2024, the court ruled that the Alliance Defending Freedom lacked standing to bring the suit.

In January 2023, GenBioPro filed suit to overturn state laws that prohibit sale of mifepristone, claiming that such laws are invalid because it is a federally approved drug.

The argument that state laws seeking to ban or restrict the use of mifepristone are preempted by the FDA's decision to make the drug available is supported by a number of Supreme Court decisions, including opinions by the traditionally more conservative Justices.

In March 2023, Wyoming became the first US state to ban the pill.

In April 2023, in a lawsuit brought by 17 US states and the District of Columbia, federal district judge Thomas O. Rice issued a temporary injunction that the FDA should not reduce access to mifepristone in these states and the district.

In May 2024, the state of Louisiana classified mifepristone and misoprostol as controlled substances, with penalties for possession without a prescription. The move follows concerns over coerced abortion and has drawn criticism from over 240 doctors in the state.

In December 2025, the states of Florida and Texas filed a lawsuit against the FDA challenging its approval of mifepristone in 2000 and approval of a generic in 2025.

After regulations on abortion early in pregnancy were ruled constitutional by the 2022 decision *Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization*, some states enacted restrictions on abortions and abortion pills. In January 2023, the United States Department of Justice issued an interpretation of the Comstock Act that it was legal for United States Postal Service employees to deliver the pills in any state, because they could not know whether the pills would be used for an abortion or other purposes.

#### *FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine*

In April 2023, in the *FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine* lawsuit, federal district judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk issued a preliminary injunction suspending the 2000 approval of mifepristone, which would take effect a week later. The Fifth Circuit reversed parts of Kacsmaryk's injunction, but placed a temporary injunction on the 2016 REMS change to mifepristone. On appeal to the Supreme Court, the Court stayed both injunctions on 21 April 2023, with only Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas stating their dissent. The stay allowed mifepristone to remain legally available while the lower courts consider the merits of the case.

In June 2024, the US Supreme Court unanimously overturned judge Kacsmaryk's Fifth Circuit decision on the grounds that the Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine had no standing to challenge the FDA's regulations of mifepristone. The Supreme Court ruled that Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine did not demonstrate that they would suffer harm to warrant standing. The Court did not rule on the substance of mifepristone, abortion, or the FDA's procedures.

#### Subsection H

Some drugs are approved by the FDA under subsection H, which has two subparts. The first sets forth ways to rush experimental drugs, such as aggressive HIV and cancer treatments, to market when speedy approval is deemed vital to the health of potential patients. The second part of subsection H applies to drugs that not only must meet restrictions for use due to safety requirements, but also are required to meet postmarketing surveillance to establish that the safety results shown in clinical trials are seconded by use in a much wider population. Until December 2021, Mifepristone was approved under the second part of subsection H. The result is that women could not pick the drug up at a pharmacy, but were required to receive it directly from a doctor. Due to the possibility of adverse reactions such as excessive bleeding, which may require a blood transfusion, and incomplete abortion, which may require surgical intervention, the drug was only considered safe if a physician who is capable of administering a blood transfusion or a surgical abortion is available to the patient in the event of such emergencies. The approval of mifepristone under subsection H included a black box warning.

### Telemedical abortion

During the COVID pandemic, and coupled with growing restrictions on abortion access in conservative states, the FDA performed trial runs of telemedical abortions, allowing doctors to prescribe mifepristone and other medical abortion drugs without an in-person visit by the patient. By December 2021, the FDA advanced approval to for telemedical abortions for all registered providers. which was made final by 2023. As of July 2025, 25 states allowed telemedical abortions, the prescription of medical abortion drugs without an in-person visit to a doctor, without restriction, 13 states allowed abortion but had restrictions on telemedical abortions, and 12 states banned abortion.

The FDA's action, coupled with the *Dobbs* decision, led many conservative states to seek new laws to ban citizens in their states from telemedical abortion, or seeking penalties from those that prescribe that medication from other states. As a result, eight states where telemedical abortion was legal passed shield laws shield laws to enable physicians to remotely prescribe abortion medication to patients in states where abortion is banned. In December 2024, 27% of clinician-assisted abortions were provided through telemedicine: 12% for patients in states without restrictions, 9% for patients in states where abortion was banned, 4% for patients in states with 6-week term limits, and 2% for patients in states with telehealth restrictions.

In October 2025, Louisiana Attorney General Liz Murrill and the Alliance Defending Freedom filed Louisiana v. FDA against the Food and Drug Administration and Department of Health and Human Services challenging the 2023 Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) for mifepristone which removed the in-person dispensing requirement. The Republican Attorneys General of 21 states filed in support of Louisiana's lawsuit. The lawsuit is one of several brought by Republican Attorneys General seeking to restrict mifepristone. In April 2026, Judge David C. Joseph paused the case while the second Trump administration conducts a review of the 2023 REMS.

On May 1, 2026, Republican-appointed Judges Kyle Duncan, Leslie H. Southwick, and Kurt D. Engelhardt on the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously blocked the 2023 REMS, preventing the mailing of mifepristone country-wide. However, the Supreme Court temporarily lifted the Fifth Circuit's order via the shadow docket on May 4, and stayed it for an indefinite period on May 14, over dissent from Alito and Thomas. The ruling will remain in effect through at least the course of the Louisiana-FDA lawsuit, which is expected to continue into the year 2027.
