---
title: "Asian black bear (part 1/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asiatic_black_bear
domain: endangered-mammals-of-india
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: endangered mammals of india
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 1/2
---

# Asian black bear

(Redirected from

Asiatic black bear

)

The **Asian black bear** (***Ursus thibetanus***), also known as the **Asiatic black bear**, **moon bear** and **white-chested bear**, is a medium-sized bear species native to Asia that is largely adapted to an arboreal lifestyle. It is distributed from southeastern Iran, Pakistan, India and the Himalayas to mainland Southeast Asia, the Korean Peninsula, Taiwan, mainland China and the Russian Far East to the islands of Honshū and Shikoku in Japan. It is listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List, and is threatened by deforestation and poaching for its body parts, which are used in traditional medicine.


## Taxonomy

### Ancestral and sister taxa

Biologically and morphologically, the Asian black bear represents the beginning of the arboreal specializations attained by sloth bears and sun bears. It has karyotypes nearly identical to those of the five other ursine bears, and has 74 chromosomes. It is considered the least derived of the Old World bears. It is either a surviving, albeit modified, form of *Ursus etruscus*, specifically the early, small variety of the Middle Villafranchian or a larger form of *Ursus minimus*, an extinct species that arose 4 million years ago. With the exception of the age of the bones, it is often difficult to distinguish the remains of *Ursus minimus* with those of the modern Asian black bear.

The Asian black bear and the American black bear are thought to have genetically diverged 3 million years ago, though genetic evidence is inconclusive. Both the American and Asian black species are considered sister taxa and are more closely related to each other than to the other bear species. The earliest known Asian black bear specimens are known from the early Pliocene in Moldova. The earliest American black bear fossils found in Pennsylvania greatly resemble the Asian black bear. Investigations on the mitochondrial cytochrome b sequence indicate that the divergence of continental Asian and Japanese black bear populations might have occurred when bears crossed the land bridge between the Korean peninsula and Japan 500,000 years ago, which is consistent with paleontological evidence.

### Subspecies

| Subspecies name | Common name | Distribution | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| *Ursus thibetanus formosanus* R. Swinhoe, 1864 | Formosan black bear | Taiwan | This subspecies lacks the thick neck fur of other subspecies. |
| *Ursus thibetanus gedrosianus* Blanford, 1877 | Balochistan black bear | Southern Balochistan, Iran and Pakistan | A small subspecies with relatively short, coarse hair, often reddish-brown rather than black. |
| *Ursus thibetanus japonicus* Schlegel, 1857 | Japanese black bear | Honshū and Shikoku. Extinct on Kyushu. | A small subspecies weighing 60–120 kg (130–260 lb) for the adult male and 40–100 kg (88–220 lb) for the adult female. The average body length is 1.1–1.4 m (3 ft 7 in – 4 ft 7 in). It lacks the thick neck fur of other subspecies, and has a darker snout. |
| *Ursus thibetanus laniger* Pocock, 1932 | Himalayan black bear | The Himalayas | Distinguished from *U. t. thibetanus* by its longer, thicker fur and smaller, whiter chest mark. During the summer, Himalayan black bears occur in warmer areas in Nepal, China, Siberia, and Tibet at elevations of 3,000–3,600 m (9,800–11,800 ft). For winter, they descend as low as 1,500 m (4,900 ft). On average, they measure 1.4–1.6 m (4 ft 7 in – 5 ft 3 in) from nose to tail and weigh from 90–120 kg (200–260 lb), though they may weigh as much as 181 kg (399 lb) in the fall when they are fattening up for hibernation. |
| *Ursus thibetanus mupinensis* Heude, 1901 | Indochinese black bear | Indochina | light-colored, similar to *U. t. laniger* |
| *Ursus thibetanus thibetanus* Cuvier, 1823 | Tibetan black bear | Assam, Nepal, Myanmar, Mergui, Thailand and Annam | Distinguished from *U. t. laniger* by its short, thin coat with little to no underwool. |
| *Ursus thibetanus ussuricus* Heude, 1901 | Ussuri black bear | Southern Siberia, northeastern China and the Korean peninsula | the largest subspecies |

Until the Late Pleistocene, two further subspecies ranged across Europe and West Asia. These are *U. t. mediterraneus* from Western Europe and the Caucasus and *U. t. permjak* from Eastern Europe, particularly the Ural Mountains.

### Hybrids

Asian black bears are reproductively compatible with several other bear species, and have on occasion produced hybrid offspring. According to Jack Hanna's *Monkeys on the Interstate*, a bear captured in Sanford, Florida, was thought to have been the offspring of an escaped female Asian black bear and a male American black bear, and Scherren's *Some notes on hybrid bears* published in 1907 mentioned a successful mating between an Asian black bear and a sloth bear. In 1975, within Venezuela's "Las Delicias" Zoo, a female Asian black bear shared her enclosure with a male spectacled bear, and produced several hybrid descendants. In 2005, a possible Asian black bear–sun bear hybrid cub was captured in the Mekong River watershed of eastern Cambodia. An Asian black bear/brown bear hybrid, taken from a bile farm, is housed at the Animals Asia Foundation's China Moon Bear Rescue as of 2010.


## Characteristics

The Asian black bear has black fur, a light brown muzzle, and a distinct whitish or creamy patch on the chest, which is sometimes V-shaped. Its ears are bell shaped, proportionately longer than those of other bears, and stick out sideways from the head. Its tail is short, around 11 cm (4.3 in) long. Adults measure 70–100 cm (28–39 in) at the shoulder, and 120–190 cm (47–75 in) in length. Adult males weigh 60–200 kg (130–440 lb) with an average weight of about 135 kg (298 lb). Adult females weigh 40–125 kg (88–276 lb), and large ones up to 140 kg (310 lb).

The Asian black bear is similar in general build to the brown bear (*Ursus arctos*), but is lighter and smaller. The lips and nose are larger and more mobile than those of brown bears. The skull of the Asian black bear is relatively small but massive, particularly in the lower jaw. Adult males have skulls measuring 311.7 to 328 mm (12.27 to 12.91 in) in length and 199.5–228 mm (7.85–8.98 in) in width, while female skulls are 291.6–315 mm (11.48–12.40 in) long and 163–173 mm (6.4–6.8 in) wide. Compared to other bears of the genus *Ursus*, the projections of the skull are weakly developed; the sagittal crest is low and short, even in old specimens, and does not exceed more than 19–20% of the total length of the skull, unlike in the brown bear, which has a sagittal crest comprising up to 41% of the skull's length.

Although the Asian black bear is mostly herbivorous, its jaw structure is not as specialized for plant eating as that of the giant panda; Asian black bears have much narrower zygomatic arches, and the weight ratio of the two pterygoid muscles is also much smaller in Asian black bears. The lateral slips of the temporal muscles are thicker and stronger in Asian black bears.

In contrast to the polar bear, the Asian black bear has a powerful upper body for climbing trees, and relatively weak hind legs which are shorter than those in the brown bear and American black bear. An Asian black bear with broken hind legs can still climb effectively. It is the most bipedal of all bears, and can walk upright for over 400 m (0.25 mi). The heel pads on the forefeet are larger than those of most other bear species. Their claws, which are primarily used for climbing and digging, are slightly longer on the fore foot at 30–45 mm (1.2–1.8 in) than the back foot at 18–36 mm (0.71–1.42 in), and are larger and more hooked than those of the American black bear. On average, adult Asian black bears are slightly smaller than American black bears, though large males can exceed the size of several other bear species.

The famed British sportsman known as the "Old Shekarry" wrote of how an Asian black bear he shot in India probably weighed no less than 363 kg (800 lb) based on how many people it took to lift its body. The largest Asian black bear on record allegedly weighed 200 kg (440 lb). Zoo-kept specimens can weigh up to 225 kg (496 lb). Although their senses are more acute than those of brown bears, their eyesight is poor, and their hearing range is moderate, the upper limit being 30 kHz.


## Distribution and habitat

During the Middle Pleistocene and early Late Pleistocene, the Asian black bear ranged from the Iberian Peninsula, the Balkans to the Ural Mountains. Today, it occurs very patchily in its former range from southeastern Iran eastward through Afghanistan and Pakistan, across the foothills of the Himalayas in India and Myanmar to mainland Southeast Asia, except Malaysia. Its range in mainland China is patchy in the northeast and south, Hainan, and it is absent in much of east-central China. Other population clusters exist in Taiwan, the southern Russian Far East and in North Korea. Small remnant populations survive in South Korea, and on Honshu and Shikoku islands. It typically inhabits deciduous forests, mixed forests and thornbrush forests. In the summer, it usually inhabits elevations of around 3,500 m (11,480 ft) in the Himalayas but rarely above 3,700 m (12,000 ft). In winter, it descends to elevations below 1,500 m (4,920 ft). In Japan, it also occurs at sea level.

There is no definitive estimate as to the number of Asian black bears: Japan posed estimates of 8–14,000 bears living on Honshū, though the reliability of this is now doubted. Although their reliability is unclear, rangewide estimates of 5–6,000 Asian black bears have been presented by Russian biologists. According to the Mammal Society of Japan, the introduction of conservation policies by the Ministry of the Environment, along with a decline in hunters due to an aging population, has led to a significant increase in the population and expansion of the range of the Japanese black bear. Estimates indicate that the population rose from approximately 15,000 individuals in 2012 to around 44,000 in 2023. Rough density estimates without corroborating methodology or data have been made in India and Pakistan, resulting in the estimates of 7–9,000 in India and 1,000 in Pakistan. Unsubstantiated estimates from China give varying estimates between 15 and 46,000, with a government estimate of 28,000.

### Bangladesh

The Wildlife Trust of Bangladesh conducted an on-field survey of bears in Bangladesh from 2008 to 2010 that included Asian black bears. The survey was done in 87 different places, mostly in the north-central, northeastern and southeastern areas of Bangladesh that had historical presence of bears. The survey result says that most of the areas still has some isolated small bear populations, mainly the Asian black bears. According to the survey, the most evidence found relating to bears were of Asian black bears that included nests, footprints, local sightings, etc. There are many reports on the presence of Asian black bears in the central, north-central, northeastern and southeastern parts of Bangladesh.

Although Asian black bears still occur in different parts of Bangladesh, mainly in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, the population is very small. Conservationists fear that the species will soon be extinct in the country if necessary steps to protect it are not taken in the near future.

### China

Three subspecies of the Asian black bear occur in China: the Tibetan subspecies (*U. thibetanus thibetanus*), the Indochinese subspecies (*U. thibetanus mupinensis*), and the northeastern subspecies (*U. thibetanus ussuricus*), which is the only subspecies of bear in northeastern China. Asian black bears are mainly distributed in the conifer forests in the cold and temperate zones of northeast China, the main areas being Changbai, Zhang Guangcai, Lao Ye, and the Lesser Xingan Mountains. Within Liaoning province, there are about 100 Asian black bears, which only inhabit the five counties of Xinbin, Huanren, Benxi, Kuandian, and Fencheng. Within Jilin province, Asian black bears occur mainly in the counties of Hunchun, Dunhua, Wangqing, Antu, Changbai, Fusong, Jiaohe, Huadian, Panshi, and Shulan. In Heilongjiang province, Asian black bears occur in the counties of Ningan, Bayan, Wuchang, Tonghe, Baoqing, Fuyuan, Yichun, Taoshan, Lanxi, Tieli, Sunwu, Aihui, Dedu, Beian, and Nenjiang. This population has a northern boundary of about 50° N and the southern boundary in Fengcheng is about 40°30" N.

### Korea

By the 1990s, poaching, habitat destruction, and eradication during the Japanese occupation had led to the local extinction of the species from South Korea. In 2004, the South Korean government initiated a reintroduction program in Jiri Mountain National Park. The effort has been successful, with bears now inhabiting the park and dispersing into northern forests. In 2021, the park's bear population appeared to have reached its carrying capacity. In Korea, most of the Asian black bears live in the broad-leaved forest of the alpine region, more than 1,500 meters north of Jirisan. As of April 2018, there were 56 bears living in the wild of Jirisan.

### Pakistan

A historical and fundamental study from 1977 has provided a first comprehensive overview of the Asiatic black bear distribution across various regions of the Pakistan, including Kaghan Valley, Neelum, Astore, Dir, Kohistan, Chitral, Chilas, Rondu Valley, Gabral, Khanspur, Muree Hills, Koh e Sufaid, Kuchmina, Shin Ghar, Takht e Suliman, Khalifat Ziarat, Wam Tangi, Kalat, Kharan, Khuzdar, Jhal Jao Hills, Pab Range Hills, and Kirthar Hills. However, since then, many of these areas have not been revisited to confirm its presence, particularly in the southern districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Balochistan and Sindh. According to a 2025 review, the studies on the Asiatic black bear were mainly focused on the Himalayan black bear in the northern regions of Pakistan, mainly in the Hindukush Himalayas, with Mansehra district and Azad Jammu Kashmir as main research areas, in Mansehra district, particularly in areas such as Kaghan and the Siran Valley, including Neelum, Machiara National Park, Pir Chinasi, Pir Hasimar, Musk Deer National Park, Toli Pir National Park, Moji Game Reserve, Banjosa, Leepa Valley, Hatian Bala, Haveli, Bagh, and Muzaffarabad, and in other areas such as Battagram, Kohistan, Bajaur, Astore, Diamer, and Kumrat. The Baluchistan black bear occurs throughout the mountainous Balochistan region in western Pakistan, south-eastern Iran and south-western Afghanistan. The Baluchistan black bear is now limited in southwestern Pakistan and southeast Iran.

### Siberia

In Siberia, the Asian black bear's northern range runs from Innokenti Bay on the coast of the Sea of Japan southwest to the elevated areas of Sikhote Alin crossing it at the sources of the Samarga River. At this point, the boundary directs itself to the north, through the middle course of the Khor, Anyui and Khungari rivers, and comes to the shore of the Amur, crossing it at the level of the mouth of the Gorin River. Along the Amur river, the species' presence has been noted as far as 51° N. Lat. From there, the territorial boundary runs southwest of the river's left bank, passing through the northern part of Lake Bolon and the juncture point of the Kur and Tunguska. Asian black bears are encountered in the Urmi's lower course. Within the Ussuri krai, the species is restricted to broad-leaved Manchurian-type forests.

### Taiwan

In Taiwan, the endemic subspecies of Asian black bear, the Formosan black bear (*Ursus thibetanus formosanus*), is confined to the mountain ranges in the central regions of the island. It lives along the Central and Snow Mountain Range, with populations in the latter being more common. The largest population seems to live in Lala mountain in Chatienshan Reserve, the (Snow) Mountain area in Shei-Pa National Park and Taroko National Park south to Tawushan Reserve through Yushan National Park. It inhabits rugged areas at elevations of 1,000–3,500 m (3,300–11,500 ft). This population is estimated to comprise 200 to 600 individuals.


## Behavior and ecology

Asian black bears are diurnal, though they become nocturnal near human habitations. They will walk in a procession of largest to smallest. They are good climbers of rocks and trees, and will climb to feed, rest, sun, elude enemies and hibernate. Some older bears may become too heavy to climb. Half of their life is spent in trees and they are one of the largest arboreal mammals. In the Ussuri territory in the Russian Far East, Asian black bears can spend up to 15% of their time in trees. Asian black bears break branches and twigs to place under themselves when feeding on trees, thus causing many trees in their home ranges to have nest-like structures on their tops. Asian black bears will rest for short periods in nests on trees standing fifteen feet or higher.

Asian black bears do not hibernate over most of their range. They may hibernate in their colder, northern ranges, though some bears will simply move to lower elevations. Nearly all pregnant sows hibernate. Asian black bears prepare their dens for hibernation in mid-October, and will sleep from November until March. Their dens can either be dug-out hollow trees (60 feet above ground), caves or holes in the ground, hollow logs, or steep, mountainous and sunny slopes. They may also den in abandoned brown bear dens. Asian black bears tend to den at lower elevations and on less steep slopes than brown bears. Female Asian black bears emerge from dens later than do males, and female Asian black bears with cubs emerge later than barren females. Asian black bears tend to be less mobile than brown bears. With sufficient food, Asian black bears can remain in an area of roughly 1–2 km2 (0.39–0.77 sq mi), and sometimes even as little as 0.5–1 km2 (0.19–0.39 sq mi).

Asian black bears have a wide range of vocalizations, including grunts, whines, roars, slurping sounds (sometimes made when feeding) and "an appalling row" when wounded, alarmed or angry. They emit loud hisses when issuing warnings or threats, and scream when fighting. When approaching other bears, they produce "tut tut" sounds, thought to be produced by bears snapping their tongue against the roof of their mouth. When courting, they emit clucking sounds.

### Reproduction and life cycle

Within Sikhote-Alin, the breeding season of Asian black bears occurs earlier than in brown bears, starting from mid-June to mid-August. Birth also occurs earlier, in mid-January. By October, the uterine horns of pregnant females grow to 15–22 mm (0.59–0.87 in). By late December, the embryos weigh 75 grams. Sows generally have their first litter at the age of three years. Pregnant females generally make up 14% of populations. Similar to brown bears, Asian black bears have delayed implantation. Sows usually give birth in caves or hollow trees in winter or early spring after a gestation period of 200–240 days. Cubs weigh 13 ounces at birth, and will begin walking at four days of age, and open their eyes three days later. The skulls of newborn Asian black bear cubs bear great resemblance to those of adult sun bears. Litters can consist of 1–4 cubs, with 2 being the average. Cubs have a slow growth rate, reaching only 2.5 kg by May. Asian black bear cubs will nurse for 104–130 weeks, and become independent at 24–36 months. There is usually a 2–3 year interval period before females produce subsequent litters. The average lifespan in the wild is 25 years, while the oldest Asian black bear in captivity died at the age of 44.

### Feeding

The Asian black bear is omnivorous and feeds on insects, beetle larvae, invertebrates, termites, grubs, carrion, bees, eggs, garbage, mushrooms, grasses, bark, roots, tubers, fruits, nuts, seeds, honey, herbs, acorns, cherries, dogwood and grain. It eats pine nuts and acorns of the previous year in the April–May period. In times of scarcity, it enters river valleys to gain access to hazelnuts and insect larvae in rotting logs. From mid-May through late June, it supplement its diet with green vegetation and fruit. Through July to September, it climbs trees to eat bird cherries, pine cones, vines and grapes. On rare occasions, it eats dead fish during the spawning season, though this constitutes a much lesser portion of its diet. In the 1970s, Asian black bears were reported to kill and eat Hanuman langurs in Nepal. Although herbivorous to a greater degree than the brown bear, and more carnivorous than the American black bear, the Asian black bear is not as specialized but more opportunistic, gorging on a variety of seasonal high calorie foods, storing the excess calories as fat, and then hibernates during times of scarcity. It also kills ungulates with some regularity, including domestic livestock. Wild ungulate prey can include muntjacs, serow, takin, Malayan tapir wild boar and adult water buffaloes, which it kills by breaking their necks.

Black bears in Japan, specifically, are reported as mainly eating acorns throughout the year and having similar caloric fluctuations. Their energy balance declines from May to June, rises again in August through October, and declines once more in November. Male and female bears both have a higher energy balance in good mast years rather than poor mast years. Moreover, during a poor mast year, male bears' energy intake will become negative in February during their hibernation period, and will not exceed zero until August, even if they can begin feeding earlier in the year.

### Interspecific predatory relationships

The Asian black bear's range overlaps with that of the sloth bear in central and southern India, the sun bear in Southeast Asia and the brown bear in the southern part of the Russian Far East. Asian black bears seem to intimidate Himalayan brown bears in direct encounters. They eat the fruit dropped by Asian black bears from trees, as they themselves are too large and cumbersome to climb. Ussuri brown bears may attack Asian black bears.

Asian black bears are occasionally attacked by tigers and brown bears. Leopards are known to prey on bear cubs younger than two years old. Packs of wolves and Eurasian lynxes are potential predators of bear cubs as well. Asian black bears usually dominate Amur leopards in physical confrontations in heavily vegetated areas, while leopards are uppermost in open areas, though the outcome of such encounters is largely dependent on the size of the individual animals.

Tigers occasionally attack and consume Asian black bears. Russian hunters found their remains in tiger scats, and Asian black bear carcasses showing evidence of tiger predation. To escape tigers, Asian black bears rush up a tree and wait for the tiger to leave, though some tigers will pretend to leave, and wait for the bear to descend. Tigers prey foremost on young bears. Some are very tenacious when attacked: Jim Corbett observed a fight between a tiger and the largest Asian black bear he had ever seen. The bear managed to chase off the tiger, despite having half its nose and scalp torn off. He twice saw Asian black bears carry off tiger kills when the latter was absent. Asian black bears are usually safe from tiger attacks once they reach five years of age. One fatal attack of a tiger on a juvenile Asian black bear has been recorded in Jigme Dorji National Park. One Siberian tiger was reported to have lured an Asian black bear by imitating its mating call. However, Asian black bears are probably less vulnerable to tiger attacks than brown bears, due to their habit of living in hollows or in close set rocks.


## Conservation

The Asian black bear is listed as a protected animal in China's National Protection Wildlife Law, which stipulates that anyone hunting or catching bears without permits will be subject to severe punishment.

Although the Asian black bear is protected in India, due to being listed as vulnerable in the Red Data Book in Appendix I of CITES in India and in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act and its 1991 amendment, it has been difficult to prosecute those accused of poaching Asian black bears due to lack of witnesses and lack of Wildlife Forensic Labs to detect the originality of confiscated animal parts or products. Moreover, due to India's wide-stretching boundaries with other nations such as Pakistan, Tibet, China, Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh and Myanmar, it is difficult to police such borders, which are often in mountainous terrain.

Five Asian black bear populations, occurring in Kyushu, Shikoku, West-Chugoku, East-Chugoku and Kii areas, were listed as endangered by the Environmental Agency in the Japanese Red Data Book in 1991. Small isolated populations in the Tanzawa and Shimokita areas of mainland Honshū were listed as endangered in 1995. In 2000, the Ministry of the Environment introduced a bear management manual that set an upper limit on the annual capture rate relative to the estimated population, marking a full shift toward conservation policy. The manual has since undergone several revisions. As hunting quotas declined and as the number of hunters decreased due to an aging population, the Japanese black bear population grew rapidly through 2023, particularly on Honshu.

Asian black bears occur as an infrequent species in the Red Data Book of Russia, thus falling under special protection and hunting is prohibited. There is currently a strong movement to legalize the hunting of Russian black bears, which is supported by most of the local scientific community.

As of January 30, 1989, Taiwan's Formosan black bears have been listed as an endangered species under the Natural and Cultural Heritage Act on, and was later listed as a Conserved Species Category I.

The Vietnamese government issued Decision 276/QD, 276/1989, which prohibits the hunting and exporting of Asian black bears. The Red Book of Vietnam lists Vietnamese black bears as endangered.

The Korean Government designated the Asian black bear as Natural Monument No. 329 and it is considered an extinction crisis. At the present time, the Endangered Species Restoration Center of Korea National Park Service is going through species restoration business.

The Asiatic black bear and the subspecies Baluchistan black bear have been classified as vulnerable since 1979 and critically endangered since 1996 in Pakistan, respectively, on the IUCN Red List. Additionally, they are both listed in Appendix I of the Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species. Currently, numerous studies focusing on the use of advanced technological tools—such as modern cameras, GIS applications, and ecological modelling —as well as the administration of questionnaires in various villages where the Asiatic black bear has come into conflict with local communities, have helped to identify and design new strategies for bear's conservation.


## Threats

The main habitat threat to Asian black bears is overcutting of forests, mainly due to human populations increasing to over 430,000 in regions where bears are distributed, in the Shaanxi, Ganshu, and Sichuan provinces. 27 forestry enterprises were built in these areas between 1950 and 1985 (excluding the lumbering units belonging to the county). By the early 1990s, the Asian black bear distribution area was reduced to only one-fifth of the area that existed before the 1940s. Isolated bear populations face environmental and genetic stress in these circumstances. However, one of the most important reasons for their decrease involves overhunting, as Asian black bear paws, gall bladders and cubs have great economic value. Asian black bear harvests are maintained at a high level due to the harm they cause to crops, orchards and bee farms. During the 1950s and 1960s, 1,000 Asian black bears were harvested annually in the Heilongjiang Province. However, purchased furs were reduced by 4/5, even by 9/10 yearly in the late 1970s to the early 1980s. Asian black bears have also been declining annually in Dehong Dai and Jingpo Autonomous Prefecture and Yunnan.

Poaching for gall bladders and skin are the main threats faced by Asian black bears in India.

In Pakistan, in addition to direct killing, commercial poaching, and human-bear conflict, the primary concerns are habitat loss brought on by logging, the growth of plantations and agriculture, road networks, and dams. From 11,807 km² in the 1950s to 7,925 km² in 2014, the Asiatic black bear population has decreased. It primarily inhabits lower-altitude areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Gilgit-Baltistan, and Azad Jammu and Kashmir, which are distinguished by densely populated areas, forested vegetation, and related agriculture.

From the 1970s to the 1980s, Japan conducted large-scale culling of black bears in spring to prevent bark stripping of cedar and cypress plantations, which led to a sharp decline in their population. In response, from the late 1980s, hunting restrictions and voluntary self-restraint were introduced in western Japan, reducing the number of bears hunted, although poaching remained a problem. In 2000, the Ministry of the Environment established a management manual aimed at population recovery, explicitly setting annual culling limits based on estimated population size; this manual was subsequently revised several times. Following this, hunting numbers declined due to both conservation policies and the aging hunter population, allowing the bear population to recover. Combined with poor mast production caused by climate change, this population recovery contributed to a sharp increase in injuries and fatalities caused by bears around 2023, reaching a record high in 2025. Consequently, in 2024, the Japanese government revised the existing black bear conservation plan, shifting toward a more proactive population management policy through hunting, with many bears again becoming targets for culling.

Although Asian black bears have been afforded protection in Russia since 1983, illegal poaching, fueled by a growing demand for bear parts in the Asian market, is still a major threat to the Russian population. Many workers of Chinese and Korean origin, supposedly employed in the timber industry, are actually involved in the illegal trade. Some Russian sailors reportedly purchase bear parts from local hunters to sell them to Japanese and Southeast Asian clients. Russia's rapidly growing timber industry has been a serious threat to the Asian black bear's home range for three decades. The cutting of trees containing cavities deprives Asian black bears of their main source of dens, and forces them to den on the ground or in rocks, thus making them more vulnerable to tigers, brown bears and hunters.

In Taiwan, Asian black bears are not actively pursued, though steel traps set out for wild boars have been responsible for unintentional bear trappings. Timber harvesting has largely stopped being a major threat to Taiwan's Asian black bear population, though a new policy concerning the transfer of ownership of hill land from the government to private interests has the potential to affect some lowland habitat, particularly in the eastern part of the nation. The building of new cross island highways through bear habitat is also potentially threatening.

Vietnamese black bear populations have declined rapidly due to the pressures of human population growth and unstable settlement. Vietnamese forests have been shrinking: of the 87,000 km2 (34,000 sq mi) of natural forests, about 1,000 km2 (390 sq mi) disappear every year. Hunting pressures have also increased with a coinciding decline of environmental awareness.

South Korea remains one of two countries to allow bear bile farming to continue legally. As reported in 2009, approximately 1,374 Asian black bears reside in an estimated 74 bear farms, where they are kept for slaughter to fuel the demands of traditional Asian medicine. In sharp contrast, fewer than 20 Asian black bears can be found at Jirisan Restoration Center, located in Korea's Jirisan National Park.

In recent years, climate change has also contributed to the declining Asian black bear population across southern and southeastern Iran. As large mammals, these bears respond more to climate change than small prey species. Due to their large size, Asian black bears are unable to utilize micro-climatic refuges, like hiding in grass to regulate temperature. Over the past thirty years, a thirty to forty percent decrease has been reported in the Asian black bear population, correlating with the rise in global temperatures. Along with that, a ten percent decrease in suitable habitat has been reported since 2016, due to climate change and deforestation.
