---
title: "Rails Routing from the Outside In (part 2/2)"
source: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html
domain: ruby
license: Ruby-BSD / CC-BY-SA-4.0 (Rails guides)
tags: ruby, rails, rubygem
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## 4. Customizing Resourceful Routes

While the default routes and helpers generated by `resources` will usually serve you well, you may need to customize them in some way. Rails allows for several different ways to customize the resourceful routes and helpers. This section will detail the available options.

### 4.1. Specifying a Controller to Use

The `:controller` option lets you explicitly specify a controller to use for the resource. For example:

```ruby
resources :photos, controller: "images"
```

will recognize incoming paths beginning with `/photos` but route to the `Images` controller:

| HTTP Verb | Path | Controller#Action | Named Route Helper |
|---|---|---|---|
| GET | /photos | images#index | photos_path |
| GET | /photos/new | images#new | new_photo_path |
| POST | /photos | images#create | photos_path |
| GET | /photos/:id | images#show | photo_path(:id) |
| GET | /photos/:id/edit | images#edit | edit_photo_path(:id) |
| PATCH/PUT | /photos/:id | images#update | photo_path(:id) |
| DELETE | /photos/:id | images#destroy | photo_path(:id) |

For namespaced controllers you can use the directory notation. For example:

```ruby
resources :user_permissions, controller: "admin/user_permissions"
```

This will route to the `Admin::UserPermissionsController` instance.

Only the directory notation is supported. Specifying the controller with Ruby constant notation (e.g. `controller: 'Admin::UserPermissions'`) is not supported.

### 4.2. Specifying Constraints on `id`

You can use the `:constraints` option to specify a required format on the implicit `id`. For example:

```ruby
resources :photos, constraints: { id: /[A-Z][A-Z][0-9]+/ }
```

This declaration constrains the `:id` parameter to match the given regular expression. The router would no longer match `/photos/1` to this route. Instead, `/photos/RR27` would match.

You can specify a single constraint to apply to a number of routes by using the block form:

```ruby
constraints(id: /[A-Z][A-Z][0-9]+/) do
  resources :photos
  resources :accounts
end
```

You can use the more advanced constraints available in non-resourceful routes section in this context as well.

By default the `:id` parameter doesn't accept dots - this is because the dot is used as a separator for formatted routes. If you need to use a dot within an `:id` add a constraint which overrides this - for example `id: /[^\/]+/` allows anything except a slash.

### 4.3. Overriding the Named Route Helpers

The `:as` option lets you override the default naming for the route helpers. For example:

```ruby
resources :photos, as: "images"
```

This will match `/photos` and route the requests to `PhotosController` as usual, *but* use the value of the `:as` option to name the helpers `images_path` etc., as shown:

| HTTP Verb | Path | Controller#Action | Named Route Helper |
|---|---|---|---|
| GET | /photos | photos#index | images_path |
| GET | /photos/new | photos#new | new_image_path |
| POST | /photos | photos#create | images_path |
| GET | /photos/:id | photos#show | image_path(:id) |
| GET | /photos/:id/edit | photos#edit | edit_image_path(:id) |
| PATCH/PUT | /photos/:id | photos#update | image_path(:id) |
| DELETE | /photos/:id | photos#destroy | image_path(:id) |

The `:path_names` option lets you override the default `new` and `edit` segment in paths. For example:

```ruby
resources :photos, path_names: { new: "make", edit: "change" }
```

This would allow paths such as `/photos/make` and `/photos/1/change` instead of `/photos/new` and `/photos/1/edit`.

The route helpers and controller action names aren't changed by this option. The two paths shown would have `new_photo_path` and `edit_photo_path` helpers and still route to the `new` and `edit` actions.

It is also possible to change this option uniformly for all of your routes by using a `scope` block:

```ruby
scope path_names: { new: "make" } do
  # rest of your routes
end
```

### 4.5. Prefixing the Named Route Helpers with `:as`

You can use the `:as` option to prefix the named route helpers that Rails generates for a route. Use this option to prevent name collisions between routes using a path scope. For example:

```ruby
scope "admin" do
  resources :photos, as: "admin_photos"
end

resources :photos
```

This changes the route helpers for `/admin/photos` from `photos_path`, `new_photo_path`, etc. to `admin_photos_path`, `new_admin_photo_path`, etc. Without the addition of `as: 'admin_photos'` on the scoped `resources :photos`, the non-scoped `resources :photos` will not have any route helpers.

To prefix a group of route helpers, use `:as` with `scope`:

```ruby
scope "admin", as: "admin" do
  resources :photos, :accounts
end

resources :photos, :accounts
```

Just as before, this changes the `/admin` scoped resource helpers to `admin_photos_path` and `admin_accounts_path`, and allows the non-scoped resources to use `photos_path` and `accounts_path`.

The `namespace` scope will automatically add `:as` as well as `:module` and `:path` prefixes.

### 4.6. Using `:as` in Nested Resources

The `:as` option can override routing helper names for resources in nested routes as well. For example:

```ruby
resources :magazines do
  resources :ads, as: "periodical_ads"
end
```

This will create routing helpers such as `magazine_periodical_ads_url` and `edit_magazine_periodical_ad_path` instead of the default `magazine_ads_url` and `edit_magazine_ad_path`.

### 4.7. Parametric Scopes

You can prefix routes with a named parameter:

```ruby
scope ":account_id", as: "account", constraints: { account_id: /\d+/ } do
  resources :articles
end
```

This will provide you with paths such as `/1/articles/9` and will allow you to reference the `account_id` part of the path as `params[:account_id]` in controllers, helpers, and views.

It will also generate path and URL helpers prefixed with `account_`, into which you can pass your objects as expected:

```ruby
account_article_path(@account, @article) # => /1/article/9
url_for([@account, @article])            # => /1/article/9
form_with(model: [@account, @article])   # => <form action="/1/article/9" ...>
```

The `:as` option is also not mandatory, but without it, Rails will raise an error when evaluating `url_for([@account, @article])` or other helpers that rely on `url_for`, such as `form_with`.

### 4.8. Restricting the Routes Created

By default, using `resources` creates routes for the seven default actions (`index`, `show`, `new`, `create`, `edit`, `update`, and `destroy`). You can use the `:only` and `:except` options to limit which routes are created.

The `:only` option tells Rails to create only the specified routes:

```ruby
resources :photos, only: [:index, :show]
```

Now, a `GET` request to `/photos` or `/photos/:id` would succeed, but a `POST` request to `/photos` will fail to match.

The `:except` option specifies a route or list of routes that Rails should *not* create:

```ruby
resources :photos, except: :destroy
```

In this case, Rails will create all of the normal routes except the route for `destroy` (a `DELETE` request to `/photos/:id`).

If your application has many RESTful routes, using `:only` and `:except` to generate only the routes that you actually need can cut down on memory use and speed up the routing process by eliminating unused routes.

### 4.9. Translated Paths

Using `scope`, we can alter path names generated by `resources`:

```ruby
scope(path_names: { new: "neu", edit: "bearbeiten" }) do
  resources :categories, path: "kategorien"
end
```

Rails now creates routes to the `CategoriesController`.

| HTTP Verb | Path | Controller#Action | Named Route Helper |
|---|---|---|---|
| GET | /kategorien | categories#index | categories_path |
| GET | /kategorien/neu | categories#new | new_category_path |
| POST | /kategorien | categories#create | categories_path |
| GET | /kategorien/:id | categories#show | category_path(:id) |
| GET | /kategorien/:id/bearbeiten | categories#edit | edit_category_path(:id) |
| PATCH/PUT | /kategorien/:id | categories#update | category_path(:id) |
| DELETE | /kategorien/:id | categories#destroy | category_path(:id) |

### 4.10. Specifying the Singular Form of a Resource

If you need to override the singular form of a resource, you can add a rule to Active Support Inflector via `inflections`:

```ruby
ActiveSupport::Inflector.inflections do |inflect|
  inflect.irregular "tooth", "teeth"
end
```

### 4.11. Renaming Default Route Parameter `id`

It is possible to rename the default parameter name `id` with the `:param` option. For example:

```ruby
resources :videos, param: :identifier
```

Will now use `params[:identifier]` instead of `params[:id]`.

```plaintext
    videos GET  /videos(.:format)                  videos#index
           POST /videos(.:format)                  videos#create
 new_video GET  /videos/new(.:format)              videos#new
edit_video GET  /videos/:identifier/edit(.:format) videos#edit
```

```ruby
Video.find_by(id: params[:identifier])

# Instead of
Video.find_by(id: params[:id])
```

You can override `ActiveRecord::Base#to_param` of the associated model to construct a URL:

```ruby
class Video < ApplicationRecord
  def to_param
    identifier
  end
end
```

```irb
irb> video = Video.find_by(identifier: "Roman-Holiday")
irb> edit_video_path(video)
=> "/videos/Roman-Holiday/edit"
```


## 5. Inspecting Routes

Rails offers a few different ways of inspecting and testing your routes.

### 5.1. Listing Existing Routes

To get a complete list of routes available in an application, visit `http://localhost:3000/rails/info/routes` in the **development** environment. You can also execute the `bin/rails routes` command in your terminal to get the same output.

Both methods will list all of your routes, in the same order that they appear in `config/routes.rb`. For each route, you'll see:

- The route name (if any)
- The HTTP verb used (if the route doesn't respond to all verbs)
- The URL pattern to match
- The routing parameters for the route

For example, here's a small section of the `bin/rails routes` output for a RESTful route:

```plaintext
    users GET    /users(.:format)          users#index
          POST   /users(.:format)          users#create
 new_user GET    /users/new(.:format)      users#new
edit_user GET    /users/:id/edit(.:format) users#edit
```

The route name (`new_user` above, for example) can be considered the base for deriving route helpers. To get the name of a route helper, add the suffix `_path` or `_url` to the route name (`new_user_path`, for example).

You can also use the `--expanded` option to turn on the expanded table formatting mode.

```console
$ bin/rails routes --expanded

--[ Route 1 ]----------------------------------------------------
Prefix            | users
Verb              | GET
URI               | /users(.:format)
Controller#Action | users#index
--[ Route 2 ]----------------------------------------------------
Prefix            |
Verb              | POST
URI               | /users(.:format)
Controller#Action | users#create
--[ Route 3 ]----------------------------------------------------
Prefix            | new_user
Verb              | GET
URI               | /users/new(.:format)
Controller#Action | users#new
--[ Route 4 ]----------------------------------------------------
Prefix            | edit_user
Verb              | GET
URI               | /users/:id/edit(.:format)
Controller#Action | users#edit
```

### 5.2. Searching Routes

You can search through your routes with the grep option: `-g`. This outputs any routes that partially match the URL helper method name, the HTTP verb, or the URL path.

```console
$ bin/rails routes -g new_comment
$ bin/rails routes -g POST
$ bin/rails routes -g admin
```

If you only want to see the routes that map to a specific controller, there's the controller option: `-c`.

```console
$ bin/rails routes -c users
$ bin/rails routes -c admin/users
$ bin/rails routes -c Comments
$ bin/rails routes -c Articles::CommentsController
```

The output from `bin/rails routes` is easier to read if you widen your terminal window until the output lines don't wrap or use the `--expanded` option.

### 5.3. Listing Unused Routes

You can scan your application for unused routes with the `--unused` option. An "unused" route in Rails is a route that is defined in the config/routes.rb file but is not referenced by any controller action or view in your application. For example:

```console
$ bin/rails routes --unused
Found 8 unused routes:

     Prefix Verb   URI Pattern                Controller#Action
     people GET    /people(.:format)          people#index
            POST   /people(.:format)          people#create
 new_person GET    /people/new(.:format)      people#new
edit_person GET    /people/:id/edit(.:format) people#edit
     person GET    /people/:id(.:format)      people#show
            PATCH  /people/:id(.:format)      people#update
            PUT    /people/:id(.:format)      people#update
            DELETE /people/:id(.:format)      people#destroy
```

### 5.4. Routes in Rails Console

You can access route helpers using `Rails.application.routes.url_helpers` within the Rails Console. They are also available via the app object. For example:

```irb
irb> Rails.application.routes.url_helpers.users_path
=> "/users"

irb> user = User.first
=> #<User:0x00007fc1eab81628
irb> app.edit_user_path(user)
=> "/users/1/edit"
```


## 6. Testing Routes

Rails offers three built-in assertions designed to make testing routes simpler:

- `assert_generates`
- `assert_recognizes`
- `assert_routing`

### 6.1. The `assert_generates` Assertion

`assert_generates` asserts that a particular set of options generate a particular path and can be used with default routes or custom routes. For example:

```ruby
assert_generates "/photos/1", { controller: "photos", action: "show", id: "1" }
assert_generates "/about", controller: "pages", action: "about"
```

### 6.2. The `assert_recognizes` Assertion

`assert_recognizes` is the inverse of `assert_generates`. It asserts that a given path is recognized and routes it to a particular spot in your application. For example:

```ruby
assert_recognizes({ controller: "photos", action: "show", id: "1" }, "/photos/1")
```

You can supply a `:method` argument to specify the HTTP verb:

```ruby
assert_recognizes({ controller: "photos", action: "create" }, { path: "photos", method: :post })
```

### 6.3. The `assert_routing` Assertion

The `assert_routing` assertion checks the route both ways. It combines the functionality of both `assert_generates` and `assert_recognizes`. It tests that the path generates the options, and that the options generate the path:

```ruby
assert_routing({ path: "photos", method: :post }, { controller: "photos", action: "create" })
```


## 7. Breaking Up a Large Route File With `draw`

In a large application with thousands of routes, a single `config/routes.rb` file can become cumbersome and hard to read. Rails offers a way to break up a single `routes.rb` file into multiple small ones using the `draw` macro.

For example, you could add an `admin.rb` file that contains all the routes related to the admin area, another `api.rb` file for API related resources, etc.

```ruby
# config/routes.rb

Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get "foo", to: "foo#bar"

  draw(:admin) # Will load another route file located in `config/routes/admin.rb`
end
```

```ruby
# config/routes/admin.rb

namespace :admin do
  resources :comments
end
```

Calling `draw(:admin)` inside the `Rails.application.routes.draw` block itself will try to load a route file that has the same name as the argument given (`admin.rb` in this example). The file needs to be located inside the `config/routes` directory or any sub-directory (i.e. `config/routes/admin.rb` or `config/routes/external/admin.rb`).

You can use the normal routing DSL inside a secondary routing file such as `admin.rb`, but *do not* surround it with the `Rails.application.routes.draw` block. That should be used in the main `config/routes.rb` file only.

Don't use this feature unless you really need it. Having multiple routing files make it harder to discover routes in one place. For most applications - even those with a few hundred routes - it's easier for developers to have a single routing file. The Rails routing DSL already offers a way to break routes in an organized manner with `namespace` and `scope`.
