---
title: "16 May 1877 crisis (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/16_May_1877_crisis
domain: 1877
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1877
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 2/2
---

## Consequences of 16 May

### Republic of the republicans

#### Control of the institutions

In his statement to the Chamber, President Mac Mahon turned towards the future and affirmed that "the end of this crisis will be the starting point of a new prosperity". On 24 January 1878, the Chamber adopted by 313 votes to 36 the amnesty law for offences and misdemeanours committed from 16 May to 14 December 1877, an appeasement law proposed by the government and which, according to its rapporteur René Goblet, allowed "to repair the disorders committed by the 16 May".

The Universal Exhibition, inaugurated on 1 May 1878 in Paris and which attracted nearly six million visitors, was intended to show the recovery of France and its nascent Republic to the eyes of the world, while parliamentary work was suspended so as not to give a spectacle of division. Supported by Gambetta, the President of the Council Jules Dufaure showed pragmatism to reassure public opinion as well as the political class and his government initiated major projects such as the Freycinet Plan, a vast public works programme that won strong support.

The definitive break between Mac Mahon and the republicans nevertheless occurred over the question of the purge of the army administration, demanded by Jules Ferry and Gambetta. The president was also indignant when the minister Émile de Marcère presented for his signature a decree providing for the revocation, transfer or retirement of 82 mayors.

At the same time, the republicans continued their progress: the Chamber itself invalidated 70 elections on the pretext of clerical or political pressure and, following the by-elections, their number of deputies approached 400. On 5 January 1879, the republicans also won the Senate elections, the logical consequence of their victory in the municipal elections of 1877, and obtained the majority in the upper chamber. The president, deprived of all institutional support, preferred to resign on 30 January 1879 after refusing to sign the decree removing command from about ten generals. Jules Grévy replaced him the same day.

With the election of the latter, the republicans now dominated all components of power. Elected to the presidency of the Chamber, Léon Gambetta exhorted the deputies: "We can, we must all, at the present time, feel that the combats have had their day. Our Republic, finally emerged victorious from the melee of parties, must enter the organic and creative period".

- (Press drawing showing a sick man in bed while a doctor and a clergyman examine his urine in a chamber pot.)The days of the anti-republican Senate are numbered. Caricature by Pépin, *Le Grelot*, 17 March 1878.
- (Press drawing showing men wearing Phrygian caps.)The adversaries of the Republic are forced to don the Phrygian cap to pay their share. Caricature by Pépin, *Le Grelot*, 31 March 1878.
- (Press drawing showing a woman wearing the Phrygian cap.)Marianne looks with satisfaction at the 363 returning to the Chamber of Deputies. Caricature by Pépin, *Le Grelot*, 17 May 1878.
- (Drawing showing a man speaking at the rostrum, holding glasses in his right hand and a letter in his left.)Jules Grévy reading the resignation letter of Mac Mahon from the rostrum of the Chamber, 30 January 1879.

#### Total victory of the republicans

While the historian Odile Rudelle speaks of the "absolute Republic" to describe the years that mark the definitive conquest of the regime by the republicans, Vincent Duclert calls it the "Republic of the republicans" .

For the philosopher Jacques Bouveresse, the 16 May crisis is not a mere constitutional debate but the consecration of the republican conception of the future which consists not only in founding a new constitutional regime, but in laying the foundations of a new society. From his point of view, the events of 1877 made it possible to "seal the great republican alliance between the bourgeoisie, its rural allies, the labour movement and its sympathisers" symbolised by the funeral of Adolphe Thiers in September: "the labour movement and the extreme left now accept the government of the conciliatory centre, of the republicans grouped around Gambetta, in exchange for amnesty and, in the longer term, very long term, human and social progress", even if that means allying with the successors of Thiers, who had "repressed the Commune with unheard-of ferocity". President Mac Mahon then appears as a scapegoat whose moral order government and dualist reading of the Constitution amount to an "irremissible crime against democracy", far more than the massacre of the Communards during the Bloody Week.

Ultimately, the resolution of the crisis without violence or transgression of legality demonstrates the "pacification" of French political life that results from the rooting of parliamentary liberalism in the country and President Mac Mahon's initiative can be seen as the authoritarian act of a head of state to try to recover the power that was his in a hierarchical society, organised by religion and governed by a king. As the historian Jean-Marie Mayeur points out, 16 May coup reflects the desire of the "elites of old France" to preserve their influence and that of the Church on society at the expense of the promotion of "the new layer". The presidential initiative is therefore only a last gasp of tradition to resist modernity, and Mac Mahon's submission on 13 December, in the continuation of the republican successes in the legislative elections of 1876 and 1877, testifies to the strength acquired by the Republic, "henceforth synonymous with legality". The historian Raymond Huard considers that from this date, "the shadow of the 2 December was thus tending to fade".

In the months following the president's submission, the appeasement advocated by Gambetta and desired by a large majority of the political class materialised in the abandonment of proceedings against the ministers of the 17 May cabinet, a measure approved by the Chamber at the request of the new President of the Council William Waddington in March 1879. The triumphant Republic celebrated its victory through a series of laws aimed at uniting the French: on 14 February 1879, *La Marseillaise* became the national anthem; the return of the Chambers to Paris was adopted on 21 June and became effective in November; finally, the following year, 14 July was declared the national holiday and the amnesty of the Communards was promulgated.

### Order changes sides

In a country where social fear is no longer present, where the economy is prospering and where universal suffrage has enabled the politicisation of the masses, the possibility of a coup de force is rejected by the majority of the French , so that the disruptive effect introduced by President Mac Mahon's initiative made the fear of disorder work against the camp of conservation according to the analysis of Jean-Marie Mayeur.

The republicans who, traditionally, embodied the threat of disorder, now benefit from popular support and present themselves as guarantors of the institutions, even though their most radical adversaries threaten to use force against them. According to Jérôme Grévy, "so as not to risk destroying their image as a governmental party patiently built over six years, the republicans must refuse any temptation of violent action, even if they are sure of their right". Throughout the period, they distinguished themselves by the calm, resolution and determination they displayed, and as early as 16 May, Gambetta warned his political family against any untimely outburst.

Respect for legality and the Constitution ultimately being shared by President Mac Mahon, the risk of escalation was definitively ruled out, all the more so since the marshal's supporters were divided, as Jean-Marc Guislin reports:

> The tensions within the moral order coalition are manifest [...]: disappointment of the clericals and legitimists whose wishes are hardly taken into account, fear of the Orléanists in the face of the dynamism and authoritarian methods of the Bonapartists, oppositions on the appropriateness of the dissolution, the date of the elections, the choice of candidates, resistance or submission.

The 16 May 1877 crisis thus testifies to the reversal of political fronts. During the electoral campaign, the major titles of the liberal press such as *La Semaine financière* and the *Journal des débats* relayed the concern of business circles and associated the moral order with disorder, while praising the Republic as a guarantee of stability. From the early days of the crisis, the republicans presented the conservative manoeuvres as a peril for the country, as shown by Victor Hugo's intervention during the Senate discussion of the conforming opinion on the dissolution:

> The government is committing this imprudence: the opening of the unknown. An arrest of civilisation in the full 19th century is not possible. I vote against the catastrophe, I refuse the dissolution.

The republicans also denounced the risk of war that a clerical policy would entail, in reference to the threats that Chancellor Bismarck had uttered in 1873 when he stated that France's political alignment with the Vatican would make her Germany's sworn enemy.

### Religious question

It was over a question of a religious nature that the crisis broke out at the beginning of May, with the republicans denouncing the pressures of the Church, long accused of being favourable to a monarchical restoration, and the period ultimately reinforced the antagonism between the two camps.

Although some ecclesiastics, such as the Bishop of Orléans Félix Dupanloup, elected senator by a narrow margin the previous year and whose influence was significant with President Mac Mahon, would have wished for the formation of a cabinet more conservative than the de Broglie government, they largely supported the electoral campaign of the president's official candidates, notably through press organs such as *La Défense religieuse et sociale*, the newspaper of Bishop Dupanloup.

While the episcopate remained largely in the background, many priests engaged in a most virulent campaign. The historian Arnaud-Dominique Houte reports that foreign caricaturists then took to representing Mac Mahon as a puppet manipulated by priests.

This intrusion of the clergy into the electoral campaign tended to reinforce the anticlericalism of the republicans, with the argument of clerical intervention moreover regularly put forward by the latter to justify the invalidation of certain elections. After the president's submission, the appointment of a Protestant to Foreign Affairs in the person of William Waddington demonstrated the republican desire to provide a guarantee of neutrality in diplomatic affairs regarding religious matters.

- Anticlerical caricatures targeting Marshal Mac Mahon.
- (Colour drawing depicting a man wearing a skullcap and military uniform, on his knees before a clergyman and a man wearing a crown.)Wearing a skullcap, Mac Mahon kneels before a Jesuit and the Legitimist pretender Henri, Count of Chambord. In the background, a gagged Léon Gambetta. "It was in 1877", lithograph by Henri Rupp after a composition by Achille Belloguet.
- (Drawing depicting a bearded man in trousers and shirt holding a small moustachioed man in military uniform.)Protecting Marianne, a man of the people tramples a comminatory government decree and the Syllabus of Errors. With his right hand, he shakes Mac Mahon whose bicorne and broken sabre lie on the ground. "Anger of the People", drawing by A. Belloguet.
- (Caricature depicting figures tipping over a sedan chair.)Marianne and Léon Gambetta (depicted as a sans-culotte) tip over the sedan chair of the pope and Mac Mahon, who here suffers "another Sedan". Caricature by Thomas Nast in *Harper's Weekly*, 10 November 1877.

#### Consequences of triumphant parliamentarism

#### Ministerial instability

The historian Jean-François Chanet considers that the Seize Mai marks the transition between two eras of French democracy. After his election to the presidency of the Republic in 1879, Jules Grévy declared to the assemblies that he never wished to enter into conflict with the national will expressed through its constitutional organs: he thus renounced the use of the right of dissolution, which de facto placed the executive, and in particular the government, under the control and domination of the legislative power. The president remained an influential figure but devoid of real powers. The Third Republic then slid from a dualist parliamentarism to a monist parliamentarism, in other words a regime of assembly, which ratified the customary drift of the presidential function according to the constitutionalist Éric Ghérardi.

Grévy's election was supposed to mark for the republicans the beginning of an era of stability thanks to a Constitution "tested by trials of grand style, especially by that of the Seize Mai" according to the expression of Maurice Reclus, but it ultimately led to the opposite situation and, for Jean-François Chanet, "the hemicycle of the Palais Bourbon remained a battlefield where the corpses of ministries were no longer counted". The historian Odile Rudelle speaks of an abusive preponderance of parliamentary representation over the will expressed by the electorate that the republicans accepted all the more as ministerial instability appeared to them as a virtue against the authoritarian temptation of a head of state whose powers would be extended. In his work *Propos d'un Normand*, published in 1912, the philosopher Alain describes precisely the mechanism of vigilant mobilisation of the "citizen against the powers":

> Since the 16 May we have not a single example of even sketched resistance. One can even say that ministries are increasingly fragile in the face of unfavourable opinion; they no longer even wait for a vote; as soon as their authority is doubtful, and depends on a shift of a few votes, they leave.

#### Rejection of the right of dissolution

Thus the Seize Mai led to the weakening of the executive power in favour of the legislative power and, in French political culture, it became "a symbolic date and a reference for subsequent republican defence struggles". The right of dissolution, although enshrined in the constitutional texts and maintained by the republicans during the revision of August 1884, became after the Seize Mai and for several generations of politicians the symbol of an authoritarian danger. The socialist Léon Blum called it a "legalised coup d'État" while the lawyer and former minister César Campinchi popularised the expression "As long as Mac Mahon is dead, the Chamber will not be dissolved" to express the concerted refusal of its use. Retained in the Constitution of the Fourth Republic, the right of dissolution remained theoretical until the President of the Council Edgar Faure resorted to it on 29 November 1955 to resolve the crisis opened by the overthrow of his ministry. Largely approved by the French population, this dissolution was widely criticised in the political camp, particularly by Pierre Mendès France and the members of the SFIO, to the point of leading to the expulsion of Edgar Faure from the Radical Party, and it was only under the Fifth Republic, starting with the dissolution of 9 October 1962 decided by President Charles de Gaulle to resolve the conflict with the National Assembly on the question of the election of the head of state by universal suffrage, that parliamentary dissolution ceased to be considered an anti-republican act.


## Historiography

### Studies

Despite the fundamental role of the 16 May crisis in the definitive advent of the Republic, its historiography is sparse. While the Seize Mai is frequently mentioned in general works devoted to the early years of the Third Republic, by historians such as Daniel Halévy, Odile Rudelle, Jérôme Grévy or Jean-Marie Mayeur, as well as in biographies devoted to its protagonists, it is rarely the subject of a detailed study. In 1965, Fresnette Pisani-Ferry published with Éditions Robert Laffont, *Le coup d'État manqué du 16 mai 1877*, while on 16 November 2007, under the direction of Jean-Marc Guislin, a study day was devoted to it at University of Lille III. According to the historian Guy Thuillier, the small number of studies on the crisis and its origins is partly explained by the relative discretion of its protagonists: Jules Simon, in his memoirs entitled *Le Soir de ma journée*, practically evades the question, President Mac Mahon gives only an official version of it, and the Duke of Broglie does not address the subject at all in his *Souvenirs*.

Numerous articles and chapters in university works are nevertheless devoted to it. In 1986, Michel Winock provided a detailed account in his narrative of the political crises of contemporary French history, *La fièvre hexagonale*, and the same year, Guy Thuillier devoted a short thirteen-page study to its possible origins. Two years later, the sociologist Willy Pelletier spoke on the question at a colloquium devoted to the presidential institution. In 2002, in a work devoted to electoral incidents from the French Revolution to the Fifth Republic, Jacqueline Lalouette studied more precisely the wave of invalidations following the 1877 legislative elections, while in 2004, the jurist Jean-Pierre Machelon questioned the relevance of likening the Seize Mai to an attempted coup d'État. On another level, historians such as Bernard Ménager or Marcel Vigreux address in detail the direct consequences of the 16 May crisis in works devoted to local history, namely political life in the Nord department for the former or relations between peasants and notables in the Morvan for the latter. In 2002, Jean-Marc Guislin studied the event more particularly through the career of the minister Auguste Paris whose abundant correspondence with his wife he analyses. Studies devoted to the Seize Mai also go beyond the national framework: the American historian Susanna Barrows devoted several texts to it that highlight "the original approach of the generation of American historians of France to which she belonged compared to French historians and justifies the project of a social history of the rejection of authoritarian power through the prism of France of 16 May 1877".

### Retained date

Jacqueline Lalouette and Jean-François Chanet recall that the "Seize Mai" is one of the rare events in French history that can be designated by a date immediately intelligible, without the year being specified, like the storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, the coup d'État of 18 Brumaire carried out by Napoleon Bonaparte or the proclamation of the Republic on 4 September 1870.

But whereas this "phenomenon of memorial crystallisation" was caused by revolutionary days or coups d'État carried out under popular pressure, it applies in the case of the Seize Mai to a change of government decided by the executive power and without consultation of the assembly, in the manner of the message of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte to the National Legislative Assembly to announce the formation of an "extraparliamentary" ministry on 31 October 1849. These two events are perceived as exceptional, that is to say that they mark "refer to a turning point in political life sufficiently identifiable without the need to indicate the precise date" according to Jean-François Chanet. According to the latter, it is for this reason that the date of 16 May is retained to designate the entire process triggered by the initiative of President Mac Mahon and not that of the dissolution, the legislative elections or his final submission, because "the anomaly thus designated is therefore no longer the irruption of illegality or violence into the ordinary course of political life [...] but the doubtful legitimacy, the ill-considered choice, the untimely abruptness of an action that came to disrupt the regular functioning of the institutions adopted less than two years earlier".

All historians agree in recognising the importance of the Seize Mai in the political and institutional history of the country. For Philippe Levillain, this crisis "is part of the republican annals". He specifies that, "intended and experienced as a decisive trial of strength on the definition of conservatism, it had cascading consequences on republican mentalities and its effect was considerable on the behaviour of the rights". Jean-Marc Guislin for his part describes it as a "neuralgic" period.

### Coup d'État hypothesis

#### Atmosphere of a coup d'État

In 1877, the Third Republic was still living under the royalist threat and in the memory of the 2 December 1851 coup d'état, so that, for the republicans, "the holders of executive power are in principle suspected of seeking to increase their prerogatives to remain in power". It is for this reason that "French historiographical and political tradition has made the Seize-Mai the threat of a coup d'État", as the historian Claude Nicolet asserts. In many respects, the course of events in 1877 indeed reproduced the process of 1851 that led to the establishment of the Second Empire and the republican historiography that immediately took shape imposed for a vision of the Seize-Mai as a coup de force intended to bring down the Republic.

By obtaining the resignation of a ministry nevertheless invested with the confidence of the Chamber of Deputies and, consequently, of the nation that had elected it, President Mac Mahon gave the impression of practising "a legal coup d'État": "the presidential act could seem a violation of the national will and the affirmation of an authoritarian and personal conception of the institutions", according to the analysis of Emmanuel Cherrier. In the letter he addressed to Jules Simon, Mac Mahon placed his responsibility before the country as superior to that of the government before the Chamber, thus taking up "the logic of the Louis-Napoleonic argument" of 1851 by opposing the formal legality of the Constitution and the legitimacy of the head of state as representing the nation as a whole. More than the coup d'État of 2 December, Mac Mahon's initiative recalled the dismissal in October 1849 by President Bonaparte of the Barrot government, invested with the confidence of the National Assembly, and its replacement by the Hautpoul government favourable to him. Furthermore, Thierry Truel affirms that the speed with which the Broglie cabinet was formed suggests that the president's coup de force was premeditated.

From the opening of the crisis, Jules Ferry presented it as the struggle "of the government of the President of the Republic against parliamentary government", so that the historian Michel Winock saw the presidential initiative as an abuse of power "exercised against universal suffrage and the Republic". In 1877, the atmosphere of a coup d'État was all the more perceptible because the Bonapartists explicitly invited the president to take action, as evidenced by the articles of Paul de Cassagnac in *Le Pays* which demanded the state of siege and exceptional laws. Mac Mahon himself, in his statements, reinforced the ambiguity of the situation. On 1 July, in a speech before the army, he affirmed: "You will help me, I am certain, to maintain respect for authority and the laws, in the exercise of the mission that has been entrusted to me and that I will fulfil to the end", then on 1 October, he proclaimed: "I cannot obey the summonses of demagogy. I cannot become the instrument of radicalism, nor abandon the post where the Constitution has placed me". Furthermore, the appointment of authoritarian Bonapartists such as Fourtou to the Interior, the revocations of elected officials or magistrates, and the dissolution of municipal councils were immediately denounced as "the return of the tyrannical acts of the Empire".

#### Constitutional legality of the presidential initiative

However, the course of the 16 May crisis presents no character of illegality or violence, two criteria determining the notion of coup d'État. In the first place, as Emmanuel Cherrier notes, "physical violence is nowhere and at no time employed, and there is no seizure of power by force or the threat of force, no troop movements nor arrest of republican leaders". On the other hand, all the presidential and governmental acts of the period are established within the limits strictly defined by law. As Thierry Truel notes, "most of the dispatches sent to the prefects [...] are intended to remind them of the legal frameworks within which they can act, without falling under the blade of possible legal actions brought by republican opponents".

The crisis results above all from a difference in interpretation of the constitutional laws which still retained a certain ambiguity in 1877. If President Mac Mahon considers that the government bound to share his views, the republicans believe it is responsible only to the chamber elected by direct universal suffrage and which expresses the will of the nation, as opposed to the Senate designated by grand electors and the president elected indirectly by parliamentarians.

For Emmanuel Cherrier, "the Seize-Mai is therefore also a controversy as to the monist or dualist responsibility of the government". Nothing then obliged Jules Simon to resign since nothing expressly indicates the slightest responsibility of the government to the head of state in the constitutional laws of 1875, and the decision of the President of the Council results only from the prevalence of a dualist reading of the Constitution and the "à la française" practice of the parliamentary regime which customarily establishes the dual responsibility of ministers. The letter addressed by Mac Mahon therefore has no unconstitutional character, and even more, the president does not feel he is carrying out a coup d'État by taking this initiative: since it is up to him to appoint ministers, he believes he can also revoke them outright. Furthermore, the administrative pressure exerted by the Broglie cabinet until the legislative elections does not exceed the framework of the law: the transfer or revocation of officials is part of the powers available to the government, as is the suspension of municipal councils or the revocation of mayors, guaranteed by the laws of 14 April 1871 and 20 January 1874. In addition, while the law of 27 July 1849 subjects the peddling of newspapers and printed matter to prefectural authorisation, that of 29 December 1875 defines the referral of press offences to the correctional court, so that the censorship exercised by the government is also carried out by applying legal provisions.

For Emmanuel Cherrier, the 16 May crisis is therefore a paradoxical event: "1877 has the particularity of not being a coup d'État but of appearing as such to the republicans of the time, without even mentioning those, revanchist Bonapartists or determined royalists, who regretted that it was not one". By qualifying the action of President Mac Mahon as a coup d'État, the republicans sought above all to discredit him in the eyes of public opinion.


## Seize Mai in arts and culture

### Literature

With the corpse of an

imperial eagle

at his feet, Victor Hugo rises as a judge to write

Histoire d'un crime

.

Censorship

prohibited the publication of this admiring drawing by André Gill for

La Lune rousse

of 7 October 1877.

It was in the context of this crisis that Victor Hugo had his *Histoire d'un crime* published, a text mainly written in Brussels where the author had taken refuge the day after the coup d'État of 2 December 1851 and of which only the most pamphletary part was published as early as 1852 in the form of a book of about a hundred pages, *Napoléon le Petit*. Three days after the coup of 16 May, *La Revue politique et littéraire* announced that the writer was working on a *Histoire du coup d'État* to appear in October and simultaneously in French, English, German and Italian. From then on, while preparing the edition of his work, Victor Hugo led the fight in the Senate where he organised two meetings a week with left-wing senators and where he delivered a virulent speech against the dissolution.

The first volume of *Histoire d'un crime* appeared on 1 October, two weeks before the first round of the legislative elections, and achieved great commercial success. The sentence that the author placed as an epigraph to his work sums up the pedagogical and propagandist role he intended to assign to this publication: "This book is more than topical: it is urgent. I publish it".

In this account, the writer warns his reader against a probable and prophetic return of a coup d'État, assimilating the one carried out by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte twenty-six years earlier to establish the Empire to the initiative of President Mac Mahon. Moreover, the account does not end the day after 2 December but at the end of the French defeat at Sedan in 1870, Victor Hugo thus seeking to recall the role deemed inglorious of Mac Mahon during this rout while denouncing the responsibility of the emperor and the risk of war that a new advent of this regime would entail. Certain passages of the work are reprinted in republican newspapers but also conservative, monarchist or Bonapartist ones, each seeking to derive the best profit from it.

Other renowned writers refer to the Seize Mai crisis in their works. This is the case of Charles Péguy in his essay *L'Argent* in 1913. Evoking the changes in French culture after the end of the Ancien Régime and "the temporary dechristianisation of France", he mentions the event: "There must be a reason why, in the country of Saint Louis and Joan of Arc, in the city of Saint Geneviève, when one starts talking about Christianity, everyone understands that it is about Mac-Mahon, and when one prepares to talk about the Christian order so that everyone understands that it is about the Seize-Mai". In 1919, Marcel Proust mentions it in *In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower* to describe the talent or opportunism of his character, the Marquis de Norpois, who managed to play an important role before and after this date.

### Popular culture

From the beginning of the crisis, the authorities noted an increase in critical inscriptions and graffiti on the walls of major French cities, and the historian Susanna Barrows, who studied this phenomenon precisely, states that the Paris police prefecture files concerning these acts are four times more voluminous for the year 1877 than for any other year after the Paris Commune. She refers to a genuine "clandestine opposition culture" that sought to discredit the conservatives and more particularly President Mac Mahon, sometimes likened to a "pig", mocked for his age or his Irish origins which would make him a traitor to the nation.

These spontaneous acts follow a topographical logic. The historian notes that Parisian graffiti were mainly inscribed in the affluent districts of the city, with the aim of shocking the conservative electorate as much as possible: thus, on 1 October, the number 363, in reference to the republican deputies, was inscribed on the very façade of the Élysée Palace, and three days later, it was reproduced on a large scale on the walls of buildings Rue Saint-Honoré, on the façades of the Bank of France and the Rothschild house. Similarly, a temporal logic was at work because reports of graffiti multiplied around the most significant events of the crisis: the first two weeks of the crisis in May, the legislative elections in October and the first ten days of December, during the period of uncertainty and rumours of a coup d'État that preceded Mac Mahon's capitulation.

Susanna Barrows estimates that "faced with the moral pretensions of the regime, its adversaries took malicious pleasure in denigrating it in a scabrous, often obscene and deliberately immoral manner". The historian sees in this proliferation of gestures or acts of derision a response to the massive purge undertaken by the government which manifests itself in a form of "brief and often scathing joke" where coarse or even scatological humour is often highlighted. Susanna Barrows notes that "the nickname Macmoncon for Mac-Mahon spread. Posters were put up in urinals or whispered at café counters baroque sexual scenarios featuring the president, his wife, high ecclesiastics and monarchist ministers".

On another level, to qualify their adversaries, some republicans coined the word "seizemayeux", which Lucien Rigaud defines in his *Dictionnaire d'argot moderne* as the "nickname given to officials after 16 May, to the partisans of the reactionary policy of 16 May 1877". The term became established in the political slang of the Third Republic and was embodied after the crisis in the character of Oscar Seizemayeux, a little hunchbacked, one-eyed and toothless man, drawn by the caricaturist André Gill in issue no. 25 of the satirical weekly *La Petite Lune*. It is inspired by a famous imaginary comic character in the 1830s under the July Monarchy, Mayeux, created by the caricaturist Traviès, and bears the same first name as the Minister of the Interior of the de Broglie cabinet, Oscar Bardi de Fourtou, a figure hated by the entire republican group.

The number of the 363 republicans who signed the manifesto of 18 June immediately acquired great symbolic value, so that propaganda objects were quickly put into circulation. The portraits of the 363 as well as the printed text of the manifesto appear in particular on handkerchiefs, some of which are preserved in the National Archives or at the Bibliothèque nationale de France. Furthermore, in 1878, Aristide Bruant composed a song entitled *Les 363 ou les vendanges de la République*.


## Notes and references
