---
title: "automake (part 1/14)"
source: https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html
domain: gnu-autotools
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: gnu autotools, autoconf configure, automake build, build automation
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 1/14
---

# GNU Automake

This manual is for GNU Automake (version 1.18.1, 25 June 2025), a program that creates GNU standards-compliant Makefiles from template files.

Copyright © 1995–2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

> Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled “GNU Free Documentation License.”


## Short Table of Contents


## 1 Introduction

Automake is a tool for automatically generating Makefile.ins from files called Makefile.am. Each Makefile.am is basically a series of `make` variable definitions1, with rules being thrown in occasionally. The generated Makefile.ins are compliant with the GNU Makefile standards.

The GNU Makefile Standards Document (see Makefile Conventions in *The GNU Coding Standards*) is long, complicated, and subject to change. The goal of Automake is to remove the burden of Makefile maintenance from the back of the individual GNU maintainer (and put it on the back of the Automake maintainers).

The typical Automake input file is simply a series of variable definitions. Each such file is processed to create a Makefile.in.

Automake does constrain a project in certain ways; for instance, it assumes that the project uses Autoconf (see Introduction in *The Autoconf Manual*), and enforces certain restrictions on the configure.ac contents.

Automake requires `perl` in order to generate the Makefile.ins. However, the distributions created by Automake are fully GNU standards-compliant, and do not require `perl` in order to be built.

For more information on bug reports, See Reporting Bugs.


## 2 An Introduction to the Autotools

If you are new to Automake, maybe you know that it is part of a set of tools called *The Autotools*. Maybe you’ve already delved into a package full of files named configure, configure.ac, Makefile.in, Makefile.am, aclocal.m4, …, some of them claiming to be *generated by* Autoconf or Automake. But the exact purpose of these files and their relations is probably fuzzy. The goal of this chapter is to introduce you to this machinery, to show you how it works and how powerful it is. If you’ve never installed or seen such a package, do not worry: this chapter will walk you through it.

If you need some teaching material, more illustrations, or a less `automake`-centered continuation, some slides for this introduction are available in Alexandre Duret-Lutz’s Autotools Tutorial. This chapter is the written version of the first part of his tutorial.

### 2.1 Introducing the GNU Build System

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that as a developer in possession of a new package, you must be in want of a build system.

In the Unix world, such a build system is traditionally achieved using the command `make` (see Overview in *The GNU Make Manual*). You express the recipe to build your package in a Makefile. This file is a set of rules to build the files in the package. For instance the program prog may be built by running the linker on the files main.o, foo.o, and bar.o; the file main.o may be built by running the compiler on main.c; etc. Each time `make` is run, it reads Makefile, checks the existence and modification time of the files mentioned, decides what files need to be built (or rebuilt), and runs the associated commands.

When a package needs to be built on a different platform than the one it was developed on, its Makefile usually needs to be adjusted. For instance the compiler may have another name or require more options. In 1991, David J. MacKenzie got tired of customizing Makefile for the 20 platforms he had to deal with. Instead, he handcrafted a little shell script called configure to automatically adjust the Makefile (see Genesis in *The Autoconf Manual*). Compiling his package was now as simple as running `./configure && make`.

Today this process has been standardized in the GNU project. The GNU Coding Standards (see The Release Process in *The GNU Coding Standards*) explains how each package of the GNU project should have a configure script, and the minimal interface it should have. The Makefile too should follow some established conventions. The result? A unified build system that makes all packages almost indistinguishable by the installer. In its simplest scenario, all the installer has to do is to unpack the package, run `./configure && make && make install`, and repeat with the next package to install.

We call this build system the *GNU Build System*, since it was grown out of the GNU project. However it is used by a vast number of other packages: following any existing convention has its advantages.

The Autotools are tools that will create a GNU Build System for your package. Autoconf mostly focuses on configure and Automake on Makefiles. It is entirely possible to create a GNU Build System without the help of these tools. However it is rather burdensome and error-prone. We will discuss this again after some illustration of the GNU Build System in action.

### 2.2 Use Cases for the GNU Build System

In this section we explore several use cases for the GNU Build System. You can replay all of these examples on the amhello-1.0.tar.gz package distributed with Automake. If Automake is installed on your system, you should find a copy of this file in *prefix*/share/doc/automake/amhello-1.0.tar.gz, where *prefix* is the installation prefix specified during configuration (*prefix* defaults to /usr/local, however if Automake was installed by some GNU/Linux distribution it most likely has been set to /usr). If you do not have a copy of Automake installed, you can find a copy of this file inside the doc/ directory of the Automake package.

Some of the following use cases present features that are in fact extensions to the GNU Build System. Read: they are not specified by the GNU Coding Standards, but they are nonetheless part of the build system created by the Autotools. To keep things simple, we do not point out the difference. Our objective is to show you many of the features that the build system created by the Autotools will offer to you.

#### 2.2.1 Basic Installation

The most common installation procedure looks as follows.

```
~ % tar zxf amhello-1.0.tar.gz
~ % cd amhello-1.0
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure
...
config.status: creating Makefile
config.status: creating src/Makefile
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make check
...
~/amhello-1.0 % su
Password:
/home/adl/amhello-1.0 # make install
...
/home/adl/amhello-1.0 # exit
~/amhello-1.0 % make installcheck
...
```

The user first unpacks the package. Here, and in the following examples, we will use the non-portable `tar zxf` command for simplicity. On a system without GNU `tar` installed, this command should read `gunzip -c amhello-1.0.tar.gz | tar xf -`.

The user then enters the newly created directory to run the configure script. This script probes the system for various features, and finally creates the Makefiles. In this toy example there are only two Makefiles, but in real-world projects, there may be many more, usually one Makefile per directory.

It is now possible to run `make`. This will construct all the programs, libraries, and scripts that need to be constructed for the package. In our example, this compiles the hello program. All files are constructed in place, in the source tree; we will see later how this can be changed.

`make check` causes the package’s tests to be run. This step is not mandatory, but it is often good to make sure the programs that have been built behave as they should, before you decide to install them. Our example does not contain any tests, so running `make check` is a no-op.

After everything has been built, and maybe tested, it is time to install it on the system. That means copying the programs, libraries, header files, scripts, and other data files from the source directory to their final destination on the system. The command `make install` will do that. However, by default everything will be installed in subdirectories of /usr/local: binaries will go into /usr/local/bin, libraries will end up in /usr/local/lib, etc. This destination is usually not writable by any user, so we assume that we have to become root before we can run `make install`. In our example, running `make install` will copy the program hello into /usr/local/bin and README into /usr/local/share/doc/amhello.

A last and optional step is to run `make installcheck`. This command may run tests on the installed files. `make check` tests the files in the source tree, while `make installcheck` tests their installed copies. The tests run by the latter can be different from those run by the former. For instance, there are tests that cannot be run in the source tree. Conversely, some packages are set up so that `make installcheck` will run the very same tests as `make check`, only on different files (non-installed vs. installed). It can make a difference, for instance when the source tree’s layout is different from that of the installation. Furthermore it may help to diagnose an incomplete installation.

Presently most packages do not have any `installcheck` tests because the existence of `installcheck` is little known, and its usefulness is neglected. Our toy package is no better: `make installcheck` does nothing.

#### 2.2.2 Standard Makefile Targets

So far we have come across four ways to run `make` in the GNU Build System: `make`, `make check`, `make install`, and `make installcheck`. The words `check`, `install`, and `installcheck`, passed as arguments to `make`, are called *targets*. `make` is a shorthand for `make all`, `all` being the default target in the GNU Build System.

Here is a list of the most commonly useful targets that the GNU Coding Standards specify.

**`make all` ¶**

Build programs, libraries, documentation, etc. (same as `make`).

**`make install` ¶**

Install what needs to be installed, copying the files from the package’s tree to system-wide directories.

**`make uninstall` ¶**

The opposite of `make install`: erase the installed files. (This needs to be run from the same build tree that was installed.)

**`make clean` ¶**

Erase from the build tree the files built by `make all`.

**`make distclean` ¶**

Additionally erase anything `./configure` created.

**`make check` ¶**

Run the test suite, if any.

**`make installcheck` ¶**

Check the installed programs or libraries, if supported.

**`make dist` ¶**

Recreate *package*-*version*.tar.gz from all the source files.

#### 2.2.3 Standard Directory Variables

The GNU Coding Standards also specify a hierarchy of variables to denote installation directories. Some of these are:

| Directory variable | Default value |
|---|---|
| `prefix` | `/usr/local` |
| `exec_prefix` | `${prefix}` |
| `bindir` | `${exec_prefix}/bin` |
| `libdir` | `${exec_prefix}/lib` |
| … |   |
| `includedir` | `${prefix}/include` |
| `datarootdir` | `${prefix}/share` |
| `datadir` | `${datarootdir}` |
| `mandir` | `${datarootdir}/man` |
| `infodir` | `${datarootdir}/info` |
| `docdir` | `${datarootdir}/doc/${PACKAGE}` |
| … |   |

Each of these directories has a role which is often obvious from its name. In a package, any installable file will be installed in one of these directories. For instance in `amhello-1.0`, the program hello is to be installed in *bindir*, the directory for binaries. The default value for this directory is /usr/local/bin, but the user can supply a different value when calling `configure`. Also the file README will be installed into *docdir*, which defaults to /usr/local/share/doc/amhello.

As a user, if you wish to install a package on your own account, you could proceed as follows:

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix ~/usr
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make install
...
```

This would install ~/usr/bin/hello and ~/usr/share/doc/amhello/README.

The list of all such directory options is shown by `./configure --help`.

#### 2.2.4 Standard Configuration Variables

The GNU Coding Standards also define a set of standard configuration variables used during the build. Here are some:

**`CC`**

C compiler command

**`CFLAGS`**

C compiler flags

**`CXX`**

C++ compiler command

**`CXXFLAGS`**

C++ compiler flags

**`LDFLAGS`**

linker flags

**`CPPFLAGS`**

C/C++ preprocessor flags

**…**

`configure` usually does a good job at setting appropriate values for these variables, but there are cases where you may want to override them. For instance you may have several versions of a compiler installed and would like to use another one, you may have header files installed outside the default search path of the compiler, or even libraries out of the way of the linker.

Here is how one would call `configure` to force it to use `gcc-3` as C compiler, use header files from ~/usr/include when compiling, and libraries from ~/usr/lib when linking.

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix ~/usr CC=gcc-3 \
CPPFLAGS=-I$HOME/usr/include LDFLAGS=-L$HOME/usr/lib
```

Again, a full list of these variables appears in the output of `./configure --help`.

#### 2.2.5 Overriding Default Configuration Setting with config.site

When installing several packages using the same setup, it can be convenient to create a file to capture common settings. If a file named *prefix*/share/config.site exists, `configure` will source it at the beginning of its execution.

Recall the command from the previous section:

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix ~/usr CC=gcc-3 \
CPPFLAGS=-I$HOME/usr/include LDFLAGS=-L$HOME/usr/lib
```

Assuming we are installing many package in ~/usr, and will always want to use these definitions of `CC`, `CPPFLAGS`, and `LDFLAGS`, we can automate this by creating the following ~/usr/share/config.site file:

```
test -z "$CC" && CC=gcc-3
test -z "$CPPFLAGS" && CPPFLAGS=-I$HOME/usr/include
test -z "$LDFLAGS" && LDFLAGS=-L$HOME/usr/lib
```

Now, any time a configure script is using the ~/usr prefix, it will execute the above config.site and define these three variables.

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix ~/usr
configure: loading site script /home/adl/usr/share/config.site
...
```

See Setting Site Defaults in *The Autoconf Manual*, for more information about this feature.

#### 2.2.6 Parallel Build Trees (a.k.a. VPATH Builds)

The GNU Build System distinguishes two trees: the source tree, and the build tree. These are two directories that may be the same, or different.

The source tree is rooted in the directory containing the configure script. It contains all the source files (those that are distributed), and may be arranged using several subdirectories.

The build tree is rooted in the current directory at the time configure was run, and is populated with all object files, programs, libraries, and other derived files built from the sources (and hence not distributed). The build tree usually has the same subdirectory layout as the source tree; its subdirectories are created automatically by the build system.

If configure is executed in its own directory, the source and build trees are combined: derived files are constructed in the same directories as their sources. This was the case in our first installation example (see Basic Installation).

A common request from users is that they want to confine all derived files to a single directory, to keep their source directories uncluttered. Here is how we could run configure to create everything in a build tree (that is, subdirectory) called build/.

```
~ % tar zxf ~/amhello-1.0.tar.gz
~ % cd amhello-1.0
~/amhello-1.0 % mkdir build && cd build
~/amhello-1.0/build % ../configure
...
~/amhello-1.0/build % make
...
```

These setups, where source and build trees are different, are often called *parallel builds* or *VPATH builds*. The expression *parallel build* is misleading: the word *parallel* is a reference to the way the build tree shadows the source tree, it is not about some concurrency in the way build commands are run. For this reason we refer to such setups using the name *VPATH builds* in the following. *VPATH* is the name of the `make` feature used by the Makefiles to allow these builds (see `VPATH` Search Path for All Prerequisites in *The GNU Make Manual*).

VPATH builds have other interesting uses. One is to build the same sources with multiple configurations. For instance:

```
~ % tar zxf ~/amhello-1.0.tar.gz
~ % cd amhello-1.0
~/amhello-1.0 % mkdir debug optim && cd debug
~/amhello-1.0/debug % ../configure CFLAGS='-g -O0'
...
~/amhello-1.0/debug % make
...
~/amhello-1.0/debug % cd ../optim
~/amhello-1.0/optim % ../configure CFLAGS='-O3 -fomit-frame-pointer'
...
~/amhello-1.0/optim % make
...
```

With network file systems, a similar approach can be used to build the same sources on different machines. For instance, suppose that the sources are installed on a directory shared by two hosts: `HOST1` and `HOST2`, which may be different platforms.

```
~ % cd /nfs/src
/nfs/src % tar zxf ~/amhello-1.0.tar.gz
```

On the first host, you could create a local build directory:

```
[HOST1] ~ % mkdir /tmp/amh && cd /tmp/amh
[HOST1] /tmp/amh % /nfs/src/amhello-1.0/configure
...
[HOST1] /tmp/amh % make && sudo make install
...
```

(Here we assume that the installer has configured `sudo` so it can execute `make install` with root privileges; it is more convenient than using `su` like in Basic Installation).

On the second host, you would do exactly the same, possibly at the same time:

```
[HOST2] ~ % mkdir /tmp/amh && cd /tmp/amh
[HOST2] /tmp/amh % /nfs/src/amhello-1.0/configure
...
[HOST2] /tmp/amh % make && sudo make install
...
```

In this scenario, nothing forbids the /nfs/src/amhello-1.0 directory from being read-only. In fact VPATH builds are also a means of building packages from a read-only medium such as a CD-ROM. (The FSF used to sell CD-ROMs with unpacked source code, before the GNU project grew so big.)

#### 2.2.7 Two-Part Installation

In our last example (see Parallel Build Trees (a.k.a. VPATH Builds)), a source tree was shared by two hosts, but compilation and installation were done separately on each host.

The GNU Build System also supports networked setups where part of the installed files should be shared among multiple hosts. It does so by distinguishing architecture-dependent files from architecture-independent files, and providing two Makefile targets to install each of these classes of files.

These targets are `install-exec` for architecture-dependent files and `install-data` for architecture-independent files. The command we used up to now, `make install`, can be thought of as a shorthand for `make install-exec install-data`.

From the GNU Build System point of view, the distinction between architecture-dependent files and architecture-independent files is based exclusively on the directory variable used to specify their installation destination. In the list of directory variables we provided earlier (see Standard Directory Variables), all the variables based on *exec-prefix* designate architecture-dependent directories whose files will be installed by `make install-exec`. The others designate architecture-independent directories and will serve files installed by `make install-data`. See The Two Parts of Install, for more details.

Here is how we could revisit our two-host installation example, assuming that (1) we want to install the package directly in /usr, and (2) the directory /usr/share is shared by the two hosts.

On the first host we would run

```
[HOST1] ~ % mkdir /tmp/amh && cd /tmp/amh
[HOST1] /tmp/amh % /nfs/src/amhello-1.0/configure --prefix /usr
...
[HOST1] /tmp/amh % make && sudo make install
...
```

On the second host, however, we need only install the architecture-specific files.

```
[HOST2] ~ % mkdir /tmp/amh && cd /tmp/amh
[HOST2] /tmp/amh % /nfs/src/amhello-1.0/configure --prefix /usr
...
[HOST2] /tmp/amh % make && sudo make install-exec
...
```

In packages that have installation checks, it would make sense to run `make installcheck` (see Basic Installation) to verify that the package works correctly despite the apparent partial installation.

#### 2.2.8 Cross-Compilation

To *cross-compile* is to build on one platform a binary that will run on another platform. When speaking of cross-compilation, it is important to distinguish between the *build platform* on which the compilation is performed, and the *host platform* on which the resulting executable is expected to run. The following `configure` options are used to specify each of them:

**--build=*build* ¶**

The system on which the package is built.

**--host=*host* ¶**

The system where built programs and libraries will run.

When the --host is used, `configure` will search for the cross-compiling suite for this platform. Cross-compilation tools commonly have their target architecture as prefix of their name. For instance my cross-compiler for MinGW32 has its binaries called `i586-mingw32msvc-gcc`, `i586-mingw32msvc-ld`, `i586-mingw32msvc-as`, etc.

Here is how we could build `amhello-1.0` for `i586-mingw32msvc` on a GNU/Linux PC.

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --build i686-pc-linux-gnu --host i586-mingw32msvc
checking for a BSD-compatible install... /usr/bin/install -c
checking whether build environment is sane... yes
checking for gawk... gawk
checking whether make sets $(MAKE)... yes
checking for i586-mingw32msvc-strip... i586-mingw32msvc-strip
checking for i586-mingw32msvc-gcc... i586-mingw32msvc-gcc
checking for C compiler default output file name... a.exe
checking whether the C compiler works... yes
checking whether we are cross compiling... yes
checking for suffix of executables... .exe
checking for suffix of object files... o
checking whether we are using the GNU C compiler... yes
checking whether i586-mingw32msvc-gcc accepts -g... yes
checking for i586-mingw32msvc-gcc option to accept ANSI C...
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make
...
~/amhello-1.0 % cd src; file hello.exe
hello.exe: MS Windows PE 32-bit Intel 80386 console executable not relocatable
```

The --host and --build options are usually all we need for cross-compiling. The only exception is if the package being built is itself a cross-compiler: we need a third option to specify its target architecture.

**--target=*target* ¶**

When building compiler tools: the system for which the tools will create output.

For instance when installing GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection, we can use --target=*target* to specify that we want to build GCC as a cross-compiler for *target*. Mixing --build and --target, we can cross-compile a cross-compiler; such a three-way cross-compilation is known as a *Canadian cross*.

See Specifying the System Type in *The Autoconf Manual*, for more information about these `configure` options.

#### 2.2.9 Renaming Programs at Install Time

The GNU Build System provides means to automatically rename executables and manpages before they are installed (see Man Pages). This is especially convenient when installing a GNU package on a system that already has a proprietary implementation you do not want to overwrite. For instance, you may want to install GNU `tar` as `gtar` so you can distinguish it from your vendor’s `tar`.

This can be done using one of these three `configure` options.

**--program-prefix=*prefix* ¶**

Prepend *prefix* to installed program names.

**--program-suffix=*suffix* ¶**

Append *suffix* to installed program names.

**--program-transform-name=*program* ¶**

Run `sed *program*` on installed program names.

The following commands would install hello as /usr/local/bin/test-hello, for instance.

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --program-prefix test-
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make
...
~/amhello-1.0 % sudo make install
...
```

#### 2.2.10 Building Binary Packages Using DESTDIR

The GNU Build System’s `make install` and `make uninstall` interface does not exactly fit the needs of a system administrator who has to deploy and upgrade packages on lots of hosts. In other words, the GNU Build System does not replace a package manager.

Such package managers usually need to know which files have been installed by a package, so a mere `make install` is inappropriate.

The `DESTDIR` variable can be used to perform a staged installation. The package should be configured as if it was going to be installed in its final location (e.g., `--prefix /usr`), but when running `make install`, the `DESTDIR` should be set to the absolute name of a directory into which the installation will be diverted. From this directory it is easy to review which files are being installed where, and finally copy them to their final location by some means.

For instance here is how we could create a binary package containing a snapshot of all the files to be installed.

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix /usr
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make
...
~/amhello-1.0 % make DESTDIR=$HOME/inst install
...
~/amhello-1.0 % cd ~/inst
~/inst % find . -type f -print > ../files.lst
~/inst % tar zcvf ~/amhello-1.0-i686.tar.gz `cat ../files.lst`
./usr/bin/hello
./usr/share/doc/amhello/README
```

After this example, `amhello-1.0-i686.tar.gz` is ready to be decompressed in / on many hosts. (Using `cat ../files.lst` instead of ‘.’ as argument for `tar` avoids entries for each subdirectory in the archive: we would not like `tar` to restore the modification time of /, /usr/, etc.)

Note that when building packages for several architectures, it might be convenient to use `make install-data` and `make install-exec` (see Two-Part Installation) to gather architecture-independent files in a single package.

See What Gets Installed, for more information.

#### 2.2.11 Preparing Distributions

We have already mentioned `make dist`. This target collects all your source files and the necessary parts of the build system to create a tarball named *package*-*version*.tar.gz.

Another, more useful command is `make distcheck`. The `distcheck` target constructs *package*-*version*.tar.gz just as well as `dist`, but it additionally ensures most of the use cases presented so far work:

- It attempts a full compilation of the package (see Basic Installation): unpacking the newly constructed tarball, running `make`, `make dvi`, `make check`, `make install`, as well as `make installcheck`, and even `make dist`,
- it tests VPATH builds with read-only source tree (see Parallel Build Trees (a.k.a. VPATH Builds)),
- it makes sure `make clean`, `make distclean`, and `make uninstall` do not omit any file (see Standard Makefile Targets),
- and it checks that `DESTDIR` installations work (see Building Binary Packages Using DESTDIR).

All of these actions are performed in a temporary directory, so that no root privileges are required. The exact location and the exact structure of such a subdirectory (where the extracted sources are placed, how the temporary build and install directories are named and how deeply they are nested, etc.) is to be considered an implementation detail, which can change at any time; so do not rely on it.

Releasing a package that fails `make distcheck` means that one of the scenarios we presented will not work and some users will be disappointed. Therefore it is a good practice to release a package only after a successful `make distcheck`. This of course does not imply that the package will be flawless, but at least it will prevent some of the embarrassing errors you may find in packages released by people who have never heard about `distcheck` (like `DESTDIR` not working because of a typo, or a distributed file being erased by `make clean`, or even `VPATH` builds not working).

See Creating amhello-1.0.tar.gz, to recreate amhello-1.0.tar.gz using `make distcheck`. See Checking the Distribution, for more information about `distcheck`.

#### 2.2.12 Automatic Dependency Tracking

Dependency tracking is performed as a side-effect of compilation. Each time the build system compiles a source file, it computes its list of dependencies (in C these are the header files included by the source being compiled). Later, any time `make` is run and a dependency appears to have changed, the dependent files will be rebuilt.

Automake generates code for automatic dependency tracking by default, unless the developer chooses to override it; for more information, see Automatic dependency tracking.

When `configure` is executed, you can see it probing each compiler for the dependency mechanism it supports (several mechanisms can be used):

```
~/amhello-1.0 % ./configure --prefix /usr
...
checking dependency style of gcc... gcc3
...
```

Because dependencies are only computed as a side-effect of the compilation, no dependency information exists the first time a package is built. This is OK because all the files need to be built anyway: `make` does not have to decide which files need to be rebuilt. In fact, dependency tracking is completely useless for one-time builds and there is a `configure` option to disable this:

**--disable-dependency-tracking ¶**

Speed up one-time builds.

Some compilers do not offer any practical way to derive the list of dependencies as a side-effect of the compilation, requiring a separate run (maybe of another tool) to compute these dependencies. The performance penalty implied by these methods is important enough to disable them by default. The option --enable-dependency-tracking must be passed to `configure` to activate them.

**--enable-dependency-tracking ¶**

Do not reject slow dependency extractors.

See Dependency Tracking Evolution in *Brief History of Automake*, for some discussion about the different dependency tracking schemes used by Automake over the years.

#### 2.2.13 Nested Packages

Although nesting packages isn’t something we would recommend to someone who is discovering the Autotools, it is a nice feature worthy of mention in this small advertising tour.

Autoconfiscated packages (that means packages whose build system have been created by Autoconf and friends) can be nested to arbitrary depth.

A typical setup is that package A will distribute one of the libraries it needs in a subdirectory. This library B is a complete package with its own GNU Build System. The `configure` script of A will run the `configure` script of B as part of its execution; building and installing A will also build and install B. Generating a distribution for A will also include B.

It is possible to gather several packages like this. GCC is a heavy user of this feature. This gives installers a single package to configure, build and install, while it allows developers to work on subpackages independently.

When configuring nested packages, the `configure` options given to the top-level `configure` are passed recursively to nested `configure`s. A package that does not understand an option will ignore it, assuming it is meaningful to some other package.

The command `configure --help=recursive` can be used to display the options supported by all the included packages.

See Nesting Packages, for an example setup.

### 2.3 How Autotools Help

There are several reasons why you may not want to implement the GNU Build System yourself (read: write a configure script and Makefiles yourself).

- As we have seen, the GNU Build System has a lot of features (see Use Cases for the GNU Build System). Some users may expect features you have not implemented because you did not need them.
- Implementing these features portably is difficult and exhausting. Think of writing portable shell scripts, and portable Makefiles, for systems you may not have handy. See Portable Shell Programming in *The Autoconf Manual*, to convince yourself.
- You will have to upgrade your setup to follow changes to the GNU Coding Standards.

The GNU Autotools take all this burden off your back and provide:

- Tools to create a portable, complete, and self-contained GNU Build System, from simple instructions. *Self-contained* meaning the resulting build system does not require the GNU Autotools.
- A central place where fixes and improvements are made: a bug-fix for a portability issue will benefit every package.

Yet there also exist reasons why you may want NOT to use the Autotools... For instance you may be already using (or used to) another incompatible build system. Autotools will only be useful if you do accept the concepts of the GNU Build System. People who have their own idea of how a build system should work will feel frustrated by the Autotools.

### 2.4 A Small Hello World

In this section we recreate the amhello-1.0 package from scratch. The first subsection shows how to call the Autotools to instantiate the GNU Build System, while the second explains the meaning of the configure.ac and Makefile.am files read by the Autotools.

#### 2.4.1 Creating amhello-1.0.tar.gz

Here is how we can recreate amhello-1.0.tar.gz from scratch. The package is simple enough so that we will only need to write 5 files. (You may copy them from the final amhello-1.0.tar.gz that is distributed with Automake if you do not want to write them.)

Create the following files in an empty directory.

- src/main.c is the source file for the hello program. We store it in the src/ subdirectory, because later, when the package evolves, it will ease the addition of a man/ directory for man pages, a data/ directory for data files, etc. ~/amhello % cat src/main.c #include <config.h> #include <stdio.h> int main (void) { puts ("Hello World!"); puts ("This is " PACKAGE_STRING "."); return 0; }
- README contains some very limited documentation for our little package. ~/amhello % cat README This is a demonstration package for GNU Automake. Type 'info Automake' to read the Automake manual.
- Makefile.am and src/Makefile.am contain Automake instructions for these two directories. ~/amhello % cat src/Makefile.am bin_PROGRAMS = hello hello_SOURCES = main.c ~/amhello % cat Makefile.am SUBDIRS = src dist_doc_DATA = README
- Finally, configure.ac contains Autoconf instructions to create the `configure` script. ~/amhello % cat configure.ac AC_INIT([amhello], [1.0], [bug-automake@gnu.org]) AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([-Wall -Werror foreign]) AC_PROG_CC AC_CONFIG_HEADERS([config.h]) AC_CONFIG_FILES([ Makefile src/Makefile ]) AC_OUTPUT

Once you have these five files, it is time to run the Autotools to instantiate the build system. Do this using the `autoreconf` command as follows:

```
~/amhello % autoreconf --install
configure.ac: installing './install-sh'
configure.ac: installing './missing'
configure.ac: installing './compile'
src/Makefile.am: installing './depcomp'
```

At this point the build system is complete.

In addition to the three scripts mentioned in its output, you can see that `autoreconf` created four other files: configure, config.h.in, Makefile.in, and src/Makefile.in. The latter three files are templates that will be adapted to the system by `configure` under the names config.h, Makefile, and src/Makefile. Let’s do this:

```
~/amhello % ./configure
checking for a BSD-compatible install... /usr/bin/install -c
checking whether build environment is sane... yes
checking for gawk... no
checking for mawk... mawk
checking whether make sets $(MAKE)... yes
checking for gcc... gcc
checking for C compiler default output file name... a.out
checking whether the C compiler works... yes
checking whether we are cross compiling... no
checking for suffix of executables...
checking for suffix of object files... o
checking whether we are using the GNU C compiler... yes
checking whether gcc accepts -g... yes
checking for gcc option to accept ISO C89... none needed
checking for style of include used by make... GNU
checking dependency style of gcc... gcc3
configure: creating ./config.status
config.status: creating Makefile
config.status: creating src/Makefile
config.status: creating config.h
config.status: executing depfiles commands
```

You can see Makefile, src/Makefile, and config.h being created at the end after `configure` has probed the system. It is now possible to run all the targets we wish (see Standard Makefile Targets). For instance:

```
~/amhello % make
...
~/amhello % src/hello
Hello World!
This is amhello 1.0.
~/amhello % make distcheck
...
=============================================
amhello-1.0 archives ready for distribution:
amhello-1.0.tar.gz
=============================================
```

Running `autoreconf` is only needed initially, when the GNU Build System does not exist. When you later change some instructions in a Makefile.am or configure.ac, the relevant part of the build system will be regenerated automatically when you execute `make`.

`autoreconf` is a script that calls `autoconf`, `automake`, and related commands in the right order. If you are beginning with these tools, it is not important to figure out in which order all of these tools should be invoked and why. (But for the curious: the basic idea is to run:

1. `aclocal` (see Auto-generating aclocal.m4: Invoking `aclocal`),
2. `autoconf` (see *The Autoconf Manual*),
3. (if needed) `autoheader` (part of the Autoconf distribution), and
4. `automake` (see Creating a Makefile.in: Invoking `automake`).

If needed, tools related to Gettext (see *GNU gettext utilities*) and Libtool (see *The Libtool Manual*) are also invoked at different points. Thus, as you can see, using `autoreconf` is quite a bit more convenient.

Nevertheless, because Autoconf and Automake have separate manuals, an essential idea to understand is that Autoconf is in charge of creating configure from configure.ac, while Automake is in charge of creating Makefile.ins from Makefile.ams and configure.ac. This should at least direct you to the right manual when seeking answers.

#### 2.4.2 `amhello`’s configure.ac Setup Explained

Let us begin with the contents of configure.ac.

```
AC_INIT([amhello], [1.0], [bug-automake@gnu.org])
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([-Wall -Werror foreign])
AC_PROG_CC
AC_CONFIG_HEADERS([config.h])
AC_CONFIG_FILES([
 Makefile
 src/Makefile
])
AC_OUTPUT
```

This file is read by both `autoconf` (to create configure) and `automake` (to create the various Makefile.ins). It contains a series of M4 macros that will be expanded as shell code to finally form the configure script. We will not elaborate on the syntax of this file, because the Autoconf manual has a whole section about it (see Writing configure.ac in *The Autoconf Manual*).

The macros prefixed with `AC_` are Autoconf macros, documented in the Autoconf manual (see Autoconf Macro Index in *The Autoconf Manual*). The macros that start with `AM_` are Automake macros, documented later in this manual (see Macro Index).

The first two lines of configure.ac initialize Autoconf and Automake. `AC_INIT` takes in as parameters the name of the package, its version number, and a contact address for bug-reports about the package (this address is output at the end of `./configure --help`, for instance). When adapting this setup to your own package, by all means please do not blindly copy Automake’s address: use the mailing list of your package, or your own mail address.

The argument to `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` is a list of options for `automake` (see Changing Automake’s Behavior). -Wall and -Werror ask `automake` to turn on all warnings and report them as errors. We are speaking of *Automake* warnings here, such as dubious instructions in Makefile.am. This has absolutely nothing to do with how the compiler will be called, even though it may support options with similar names. Using -Wall -Werror is a safe setting when starting to work on a package: you do not want to miss any issues. Later you may decide to relax things a bit. The foreign option tells Automake that this package will not follow the GNU Standards. GNU packages should always distribute additional files such as ChangeLog, AUTHORS, etc. We do not want `automake` to complain about these missing files in our small example.

The `AC_PROG_CC` line causes the `configure` script to search for a C compiler and define the variable `CC` with its name. The src/Makefile.in file generated by Automake uses the variable `CC` to build hello, so when `configure` creates src/Makefile from src/Makefile.in, it will define `CC` with the value it has found. If Automake is asked to create a Makefile.in that uses `CC` but configure.ac does not define it, it will suggest you add a call to `AC_PROG_CC`.

The `AC_CONFIG_HEADERS([config.h])` invocation causes the `configure` script to create a config.h file gathering ‘#define’s defined by other macros in configure.ac. In our case, the `AC_INIT` macro already defined a few of them. Here is an excerpt of config.h after `configure` has run:

```
...
/* Define to the address where bug reports for this package should be sent. */
#define PACKAGE_BUGREPORT "bug-automake@gnu.org"

/* Define to the full name and version of this package. */
#define PACKAGE_STRING "amhello 1.0"
...
```

As you probably noticed, src/main.c includes config.h so it can use `PACKAGE_STRING`. In a real-world project, config.h can grow quite large, with one ‘#define’ per feature probed on the system.

The `AC_CONFIG_FILES` macro declares the list of files that `configure` should create from their *.in templates. Automake also scans this list to find the Makefile.am files it must process. (This is important to remember: when adding a new directory to your project, you should add its Makefile to this list, otherwise Automake will never process the new Makefile.am you wrote in that directory.)

Finally, the `AC_OUTPUT` line is a closing command that actually produces the part of the script in charge of creating the files registered with `AC_CONFIG_HEADERS` and `AC_CONFIG_FILES`.

When starting a new project, we suggest you start with such a simple configure.ac, and gradually add the other tests it requires. The command `autoscan` can also suggest a few of the tests your package may need (see Using `autoscan` to Create configure.ac in *The Autoconf Manual*).

#### 2.4.3 `amhello`’s Makefile.am Setup Explained

We now turn to src/Makefile.am. This file contains Automake instructions to build and install hello.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = hello
hello_SOURCES = main.c
```

A Makefile.am has the same syntax as an ordinary Makefile. When `automake` processes a Makefile.am it copies the entire file into the output Makefile.in (that will be later turned into Makefile by `configure`) but will react to certain variable definitions by generating some build rules and other variables. Often Makefile.ams contain only a list of variable definitions as above, but they can also contain other variable and rule definitions that `automake` will pass along without interpretation.

Variables that end with `_PROGRAMS` are special variables that list programs that the resulting Makefile should build. In Automake speak, this `_PROGRAMS` suffix is called a *primary*; Automake recognizes other primaries such as `_SCRIPTS`, `_DATA`, `_LIBRARIES`, etc. corresponding to different types of files.

The ‘bin’ part of the `bin_PROGRAMS` tells `automake` that the resulting programs should be installed in *bindir*. Recall that the GNU Build System uses a set of variables to denote destination directories and allow users to customize these locations (see Standard Directory Variables). Any such directory variable can be put in front of a primary (omitting the `dir` suffix) to tell `automake` where to install the listed files.

Programs need to be built from source files, so for each program `*prog*` listed in a `_PROGRAMS` variable, `automake` will look for another variable named `*prog*_SOURCES` listing its source files. There may be more than one source file: they will all be compiled and linked together.

Automake also knows that source files need to be distributed when creating a tarball (unlike built programs). So a side-effect of this `hello_SOURCES` declaration is that main.c will be part of the tarball created by `make dist`.

Finally here are some explanations regarding the top-level Makefile.am.

```
SUBDIRS = src
dist_doc_DATA = README
```

`SUBDIRS` is a special variable listing all directories that `make` should recurse into before processing the current directory. So this line is responsible for `make` building src/hello even though we run it from the top-level. This line also causes `make install` to install src/hello before installing README (not that this order matters).

The line `dist_doc_DATA = README` causes README to be distributed and installed in *docdir*. Files listed with the `_DATA` primary are not automatically part of the tarball built with `make dist`, so we add the `dist_` prefix so they get distributed. However, for README it would not have been necessary: `automake` automatically distributes any README file it encounters (the list of other files automatically distributed is presented by `automake --help`). The only important effect of this second line is therefore to install README during `make install`.

One thing not covered in this example is accessing the installation directory values (see Standard Directory Variables) from your program code, that is, converting them into defined macros. For this, see Defining Directories in *The Autoconf Manual*.
