---
title: "automake (part 2/14)"
source: https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html
domain: gnu-autotools
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: gnu autotools, autoconf configure, automake build, build automation
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/14
---

## 3 General ideas

The following sections cover a few basic ideas that will help you understand how Automake works.

### 3.1 General Operation

Automake works by reading a Makefile.am and generating a Makefile.in. Certain variables and rules defined in the Makefile.am instruct Automake to generate more specialized code; for instance, a `bin_PROGRAMS` variable definition will cause rules for compiling and linking programs to be generated.

The variable definitions and rules in the Makefile.am are copied mostly verbatim into the generated file, with all variable definitions preceding all rules. This allows you to add almost arbitrary code into the generated Makefile.in. For instance, the Automake distribution includes a non-standard rule for the `git-dist` target, which the Automake maintainer uses to make distributions from the source control system.

Note that most GNU Make extensions are not recognized by Automake. Using such extensions in a Makefile.am will lead to errors or confusing behavior.

A special exception is that the GNU Make append operator, ‘+=’, is supported. This operator appends its right hand argument to the variable specified on the left. Automake will translate the operator into an ordinary ‘=’ operator; ‘+=’ will thus work with any make program.

Automake tries to keep comments grouped with any adjoining rules or variable definitions.

Generally, Automake is not particularly smart in the parsing of unusual Makefile constructs, so you’re advised to avoid fancy constructs or “creative” use of whitespace. For example, TAB characters cannot be used between a target name and the following “`:`” character, and variable assignments shouldn’t be indented with TAB characters. Also, using more complex macros in target names can cause trouble:

```
% cat Makefile.am
$(FOO:=x): bar
% automake
Makefile.am:1: bad characters in variable name '$(FOO'
Makefile.am:1: ':='-style assignments are not portable
```

A rule defined in Makefile.am generally overrides any such rule of a similar name that would be automatically generated by `automake`. Although this is a supported feature, it is generally best to avoid making use of it, as sometimes the generated rules are very particular.

Similarly, a variable defined in Makefile.am or `AC_SUBST`ed from configure.ac will override any definition of the variable that `automake` would ordinarily create. This feature is often more useful than the ability to override a rule. Be warned that many of the variables generated by `automake` are considered to be for internal use only, and their names might change in future releases.

When examining a variable definition, Automake will recursively examine variables referenced in the definition. For example, if Automake is looking at the content of `foo_SOURCES` in this snippet

```
xs = a.c b.c
foo_SOURCES = c.c $(xs)
```

it would use the files a.c, b.c, and c.c as the contents of `foo_SOURCES`.

Automake also allows a form of comment that is *not* copied into the output; all lines beginning with ‘##’ (leading spaces allowed) are completely ignored by Automake.

It is customary to make the first line of Makefile.am read:

```

## Process this file with automake to produce Makefile.in
```

### 3.2 Strictness

While Automake is intended to be used by maintainers of GNU packages, it does make some effort to accommodate those who wish to use it, but do not want to use all the GNU conventions.

To this end, Automake supports three levels of *strictness*—how stringently Automake should enforce conformance with GNU conventions. Each strictness level can be selected using an option of the same name; see Changing Automake’s Behavior.

The strictness levels are:

**gnu ¶**

This is the default level of strictness. Automake will check for basic compliance with the GNU standards for software packaging. See *The GNU Coding Standards*, for full details of these standards. Currently the following checks are made:

- The files INSTALL, NEWS, README, AUTHORS, and ChangeLog, plus one of COPYING.LIB, COPYING.LESSER or COPYING, are required at the topmost directory of the package. If the --add-missing option is given, `automake` will add a generic version of the INSTALL file as well as the COPYING file containing the text of the current version of the GNU General Public License existing at the time of this Automake release (version 3 as this is written, https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html). However, an existing COPYING file will never be overwritten by `automake`.
- The options no-installman and no-installinfo are prohibited.

Future versions of Automake will add more checks at this level of strictness; it is advisable to be familiar with the precise requirements of the GNU standards.

Future versions of Automake may, at this level of strictness, require certain non-standard GNU tools to be available to maintainer-only Makefile rules. For instance, in the future `pathchk` (see pathchk invocation in *GNU Coreutils*) may be required to run ‘make dist’.

**foreign ¶**

Automake will check for only those things that are absolutely required for proper operation. For instance, whereas GNU standards dictate the existence of a NEWS file, it will not be required in this mode. This strictness will also turn off some warnings by default (among them, portability warnings).

**gnits ¶**

Automake will check for compliance to the as-yet-unwritten *Gnits standards*. These are based on the GNU standards, but are even more detailed. Unless you are a Gnits standards contributor, it is recommended that you avoid this option until such time as the Gnits standard is published (which is unlikely to ever happen).

Currently, --gnits does all the checks that --gnu does, and checks the following as well:

- ‘make installcheck’ will check to make sure that the --help and --version print a usage message and a version string, respectively. This is the std-options option (see Changing Automake’s Behavior).
- ‘make dist’ will check to make sure the NEWS file has been updated to the current version.
- `VERSION` is checked to make sure its format complies with Gnits standards.
- If `VERSION` indicates that this is an alpha release, and the file README-alpha appears in the topmost directory of a package, then it is included in the distribution. This is done in --gnits mode, and no other, because this mode is the only one where version number formats are constrained, and hence the only mode where Automake can automatically determine whether README-alpha should be included.
- The file THANKS is required.

### 3.3 The Uniform Naming Scheme

Automake variables generally follow a *uniform naming scheme* that makes it easy to decide how programs (and other derived objects) are built, and how they are installed. This scheme also supports `configure` time determination of what should be built.

At `make` time, certain variables are used to determine which objects are to be built. The variable names are made of several pieces that are concatenated together.

The piece that tells `automake` what is being built is commonly called the *primary*. For instance, the primary `PROGRAMS` holds a list of programs that are to be compiled and linked.

A different set of names is used to decide where the built objects should be installed. These names are prefixes to the primary, and they indicate which standard directory should be used as the installation directory. The standard directory names are given in the GNU standards (see Directory Variables in *The GNU Coding Standards*). Automake extends this list with `pkgdatadir`, `pkgincludedir`, `pkglibdir`, and `pkglibexecdir`; these are the same as the non-‘pkg’ versions, but with ‘$(PACKAGE)’ appended. For instance, `pkglibdir` is defined as ‘$(libdir)/$(PACKAGE)’.

For each primary, there is one additional variable named by prepending ‘EXTRA_’ to the primary name. This variable is used to list objects that may or may not be built, depending on what `configure` decides. This variable is required because Automake must statically know the entire list of objects that may be built in order to generate a Makefile.in that will work in all cases.

For instance, `cpio` decides at configure time which programs should be built. Some of the programs are installed in `bindir`, and some are installed in `sbindir`:

```
EXTRA_PROGRAMS = mt rmt
bin_PROGRAMS = cpio pax
sbin_PROGRAMS = $(MORE_PROGRAMS)
```

Defining a primary without a prefix as a variable, e.g., ‘PROGRAMS’, is an error.

Note that the common ‘dir’ suffix is left off when constructing the variable names; thus one writes ‘bin_PROGRAMS’ and not ‘bindir_PROGRAMS’.

Not every sort of object can be installed in every directory. Automake will flag those attempts it finds in error (but see below how to override the check if you need to). Automake will also diagnose obvious misspellings in directory names.

Sometimes the standard directories—even as augmented by Automake—are not enough. In particular it is sometimes useful, for clarity, to install objects in a subdirectory of some predefined directory. To this end, Automake allows you to extend the list of possible installation directories. A given prefix (e.g., ‘zar’) is valid if a variable of the same name with ‘dir’ appended is defined (e.g., ‘zardir’).

For instance, the following snippet will install file.xml into ‘$(datadir)/xml’.

```
xmldir = $(datadir)/xml
xml_DATA = file.xml
```

This feature can also be used to override the sanity checks Automake performs to diagnose suspicious directory/primary couples (in the unlikely case that you need to omit these checks). For example, Automake would error out on this input:

```
# Forbidden directory combinations, automake will error out on this.
pkglib_PROGRAMS = foo
doc_LIBRARIES = libquux.a
```

but it will succeed with this:

```
# Work around forbidden directory combinations.  Do not use this
# without a very good reason!
my_execbindir = $(pkglibdir)
my_doclibdir = $(docdir)
my_execbin_PROGRAMS = foo
my_doclib_LIBRARIES = libquux.a
```

The ‘exec’ substring of the ‘my_execbindir’ variable lets the files be installed at the right time (see The Two Parts of Install).

The special prefix ‘noinst_’ indicates that the objects in question should be built but not installed at all. This is usually used for objects required to build the rest of your package, for instance static libraries (see Building a library), or helper scripts.

The special prefix ‘check_’ indicates that the objects in question should not be built until the ‘make check’ command is run. Those objects are not installed either.

The current primary names are ‘PROGRAMS’, ‘LIBRARIES’, ‘LTLIBRARIES’, ‘LISP’, ‘PYTHON’, ‘JAVA’, ‘SCRIPTS’, ‘DATA’, ‘HEADERS’, ‘MANS’, and ‘TEXINFOS’.

Some primaries also allow additional prefixes that control other aspects of `automake`’s behavior. The currently defined prefixes are ‘dist_’, ‘nodist_’, ‘nobase_’, and ‘notrans_’. These prefixes are explained later (see Program and Library Variables) (see Man Pages).

### 3.4 Staying below the command line length limit

Traditionally, most unix-like systems have a length limitation for the command line arguments and environment contents when creating new processes (see for example https://www.in-ulm.de/~mascheck/various/argmax/ for an overview on this issue), which of course also applies to commands spawned by `make`. POSIX requires this limit to be at least 4096 bytes, and most modern systems have quite high limits (or are unlimited).

In order to create portable Makefiles that do not trip over these limits, it is necessary to keep the length of file lists bounded. Unfortunately, it is not possible to do so fully transparently within Automake, so your help may be needed. Typically, you can split long file lists manually and use different installation directory names for each list. For example,

```
data_DATA = file1 ... fileN fileN+1 ... file2N
```

may also be written as

```
data_DATA = file1 ... fileN
data2dir = $(datadir)
data2_DATA = fileN+1 ... file2N
```

and will cause Automake to treat the two lists separately during `make install`. See The Two Parts of Install for choosing directory names that will keep the ordering of the two parts of installation Note that `make dist` may still only work on a host with a higher length limit in this example.

Automake itself employs a couple of strategies to avoid long command lines. For example, when ‘${srcdir}/’ is prepended to file names, as can happen with above `$(data_DATA)` lists, it limits the amount of arguments passed to external commands.

Unfortunately, some systems’ `make` commands may prepend `VPATH` prefixes like ‘${srcdir}/’ to file names from the source tree automatically (see Automatic Rule Rewriting in *The Autoconf Manual*). In this case, the user may have to switch to use GNU Make, or refrain from using VPATH builds, in order to stay below the length limit.

For libraries and programs built from many sources, convenience archives may be used as intermediates in order to limit the object list length (see Libtool Convenience Libraries).

### 3.5 How derived variables are named

Sometimes a Makefile variable name is derived from some text the maintainer supplies. For instance, a program name listed in ‘_PROGRAMS’ is rewritten into the name of a ‘_SOURCES’ variable. In cases like this, Automake canonicalizes the text, so that program names and the like do not have to follow Makefile variable naming rules. All characters in the name except for letters, numbers, the strudel (@), and the underscore are turned into underscores when making variable references.

For example, if your program is named sniff-glue, the derived variable name would be ‘sniff_glue_SOURCES’, not ‘sniff-glue_SOURCES’. Similarly the sources for a library named libmumble++.a should be listed in the ‘libmumble___a_SOURCES’ variable.

The strudel is an addition, to make the use of Autoconf substitutions in variable names less obfuscating.

### 3.6 Variables reserved for the user

Some Makefile variables are reserved by the GNU Coding Standards for the use of the “user”—the person building the package. For instance, `CFLAGS` is one such variable.

Sometimes package developers are tempted to set user variables such as `CFLAGS` because it appears to make their job easier. However, the package itself should never set a user variable, particularly not to include switches that are required for proper compilation of the package. Since these variables are documented as being for the package builder, that person rightfully expects to be able to override any of these variables at build time.

To get around this problem, Automake introduces an automake-specific shadow variable for each user flag variable. (Shadow variables are not introduced for variables like `CC`, where they would make no sense.) The shadow variable is named by prepending ‘AM_’ to the user variable’s name. For instance, the shadow variable for `YFLAGS` is `AM_YFLAGS`. The package maintainer—that is, the author(s) of the Makefile.am and configure.ac files—may adjust these shadow variables however necessary.

See Flag Variables Ordering, for more discussion about these variables and how they interact with per-target variables.

### 3.7 Programs automake might require

Automake sometimes requires helper programs so that the generated Makefile can do its work properly. There are a fairly large number of them, and we list them here.

Although all of these files are distributed and installed with Automake, a couple of them are maintained separately. The Automake copies are updated before each release, but we mention the original source in case you need more recent versions.

**`ar-lib` ¶**

This is a wrapper primarily for the Microsoft lib archiver, to make it more POSIX-like.

**`compile` ¶**

This is a wrapper for compilers that do not accept options -c and -o at the same time. It is only used when absolutely required. Such compilers are rare, with the Microsoft C/C++ Compiler as the most notable exception. This wrapper also makes the following common options available for that compiler, while performing file name translation where needed: -I, -L, -l, -Wl, and -Xlinker.

**`config.guess` ¶**

**`config.sub`**

These two programs compute the canonical triplets for the given build, host, or target architecture. These programs are updated regularly to support new architectures and fix probes broken by changes in new kernel versions. Each new release of Automake comes with up-to-date copies of these programs. If your copy of Automake is getting old, you are encouraged to fetch the latest versions of these files from https://savannah.gnu.org/git/?group=config before making a release.

**`depcomp` ¶**

This program understands how to run a compiler so that it will generate not only the desired output but also dependency information that is then used by the automatic dependency tracking feature (see Automatic dependency tracking).

**`install-sh` ¶**

This is a replacement for the `install` program that works on platforms where `install` is unavailable or unusable.

**`mdate-sh` ¶**

This script is used to generate a version.texi file. It examines a file and prints some date information about it.

**`missing` ¶**

This wraps a number of programs that are typically only required by maintainers. If the program in question doesn’t exist, or seems too old, `missing` will print an informative warning before failing out, to provide the user with more context and information.

**`mkinstalldirs` ¶**

This script used to be a wrapper around ‘mkdir -p’, which is not portable. Now we prefer to use ‘install-sh -d’ when `configure` finds that ‘mkdir -p’ does not work; this makes for one less script to distribute.

For backward compatibility mkinstalldirs is still used and distributed when `automake` finds it in a package. But it is no longer installed automatically, and it should be safe to remove it.

**`py-compile` ¶**

This is used to byte-compile Python scripts.

**`test-driver` ¶**

This implements the default test driver offered by the parallel testsuite harness.

**`texinfo.tex` ¶**

When Texinfo sources are in the package, this file is required for ‘make dvi’, ‘make ps’ and ‘make pdf’. The latest version can be downloaded from https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/. A working TeX distribution, or at least a tex program, is also required. Furthermore, ‘make dist’ invokes ‘make dvi’, so these become requirements for making a distribution with Texinfo sources.

**`ylwrap` ¶**

This program wraps `lex` and `yacc` to rename their output files. It also ensures that, for instance, multiple `yacc` instances can be invoked in a single directory in parallel.


## 4 Some example packages

This section contains two small examples.

The first example (see A simple example, start to finish) assumes you have an existing project already using Autoconf, with handcrafted Makefiles, and that you want to convert it to using Automake. If you are discovering both tools, it is probably better that you look at the Hello World example presented earlier (see A Small Hello World).

The second example (see Building true and false) shows how two programs can be built from the same file, using different compilation parameters. It contains some technical digressions that are probably best skipped on first read.

### 4.1 A simple example, start to finish

Let’s suppose you just finished writing `zardoz`, a program to make your head float from vortex to vortex. You’ve been using Autoconf to provide a portability framework, but your Makefile.ins have been ad-hoc. You want to make them bulletproof, so you turn to Automake.

The first step is to update your configure.ac to include the commands that `automake` needs. The way to do this is to add an `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` call just after `AC_INIT`:

```
AC_INIT([zardoz], [1.0])
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE
...
```

Since your program doesn’t have any complicating factors (e.g., it doesn’t use `gettext`, it doesn’t want to build a shared library), you’re done with this part. That was easy!

Now you must regenerate configure. But to do that, you’ll need to tell `autoconf` how to find the new macro you’ve used. The easiest way to do this is to use the `aclocal` program to generate your aclocal.m4 for you. But wait… maybe you already have an aclocal.m4, because you had to write some hairy macros for your program. The `aclocal` program lets you put your own macros into acinclude.m4, so simply rename and then run:

```
mv aclocal.m4 acinclude.m4
aclocal
autoconf
```

Now it is time to write your Makefile.am for `zardoz`. Since `zardoz` is a user program, you want to install it where the rest of the user programs go: `bindir`. Additionally, `zardoz` has some Texinfo documentation. Your configure.ac script uses `AC_REPLACE_FUNCS`, so you need to link against ‘$(LIBOBJS)’. So here’s what you’d write:

```
bin_PROGRAMS = zardoz
zardoz_SOURCES = main.c head.c float.c vortex9.c gun.c
zardoz_LDADD = $(LIBOBJS)

info_TEXINFOS = zardoz.texi
```

Now you can run ‘automake --add-missing’ to generate your Makefile.in and grab any auxiliary files you might need, and you’re done!

### 4.2 Building true and false

Here is another, trickier example. It shows how to generate two programs (`true` and `false`) from the same source file (true.c). The difficult part is that each compilation of true.c requires different `cpp` flags.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = true false
false_SOURCES =
false_LDADD = false.o

true.o: true.c
        $(COMPILE) -DEXIT_CODE=0 -c true.c

false.o: true.c
        $(COMPILE) -DEXIT_CODE=1 -o false.o -c true.c
```

Note that there is no `true_SOURCES` definition. Automake will implicitly assume that there is a source file named true.c (see Default `_SOURCES`), and define rules to compile true.o and link true. The ‘true.o: true.c’ rule supplied by the above Makefile.am, will override the Automake generated rule to build true.o.

`false_SOURCES` is defined to be empty—that way no implicit value is substituted. Because we have not listed the source of false, we have to tell Automake how to link the program. This is the purpose of the `false_LDADD` line. A `false_DEPENDENCIES` variable, holding the dependencies of the false target will be automatically generated by Automake from the content of `false_LDADD`.

The above rules won’t work if your compiler doesn’t accept both -c and -o. The simplest fix for this is to introduce a bogus dependency (to avoid problems with a parallel `make`):

```
true.o: true.c false.o
        $(COMPILE) -DEXIT_CODE=0 -c true.c

false.o: true.c
        $(COMPILE) -DEXIT_CODE=1 -c true.c && mv true.o false.o
```

As it turns out, there is also a much easier way to do this same task. Some of the above technique is useful enough that we’ve kept the example in the manual. However if you were to build `true` and `false` in real life, you would probably use per-program compilation flags, like so:

```
bin_PROGRAMS = false true

false_SOURCES = true.c
false_CPPFLAGS = -DEXIT_CODE=1

true_SOURCES = true.c
true_CPPFLAGS = -DEXIT_CODE=0
```

In this case Automake will cause true.c to be compiled twice, with different flags. In this instance, the names of the object files would be chosen by automake; they would be false-true.o and true-true.o. (The name of the object files rarely matters.)


## 5 Creating a Makefile.in: Invoking `automake`

To create all the Makefile.ins for a package, run the `automake` program in the top level directory, with no arguments. `automake` will automatically find each appropriate Makefile.am (by scanning configure.ac; see Scanning configure.ac, using `aclocal`) and generate the corresponding Makefile.in. Note that `automake` has a rather simplistic view of what constitutes a package; it assumes that a package has only one configure.ac, at the top. If your package has multiple configure.acs, then you must run `automake` in each directory holding a configure.ac. (Alternatively, you may rely on Autoconf’s `autoreconf`, which is able to recurse your package tree and run `automake` where appropriate.)

You can optionally give `automake` an argument; .am is appended to the argument and the result is used as the name of the input file. This feature is generally only used to automatically rebuild an out-of-date Makefile.in. Note that `automake` must always be run from the topmost directory of a project, even if being used to regenerate the Makefile.in in some subdirectory. This is necessary because `automake` must scan configure.ac, and because `automake` uses the knowledge that a Makefile.in is in a subdirectory to change its behavior in some cases.

Automake will run `autoconf` to scan configure.ac and its dependencies (i.e., aclocal.m4 and any included file), therefore `autoconf` must be in your `PATH`. If there is an `AUTOCONF` variable in your environment it will be used instead of `autoconf`; this allows you to select a particular version of Autoconf. By the way, don’t misunderstand this paragraph: `automake` runs `autoconf` to *scan* your configure.ac; this won’t build configure and you still have to run `autoconf` yourself for this purpose.

`automake` accepts the following options:

**`-a` ¶**

**`--add-missing`**

Automake requires certain common files to exist in certain situations; for instance, config.guess is required if configure.ac invokes `AC_CANONICAL_HOST`. Automake is distributed with several of these files (see Programs automake might require); this option will cause the missing ones to be automatically added to the package, whenever possible. In general if Automake tells you a file is missing, try using this option. By default Automake tries to make a symbolic link pointing to its own copy of the missing file; this can be changed with --copy.

Many of the potentially-missing files are common scripts whose location may be specified via the `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` macro. Therefore, `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR`’s setting affects whether a file is considered missing, and where the missing file is added (see Other things Automake recognizes).

In some strictness modes, additional files are installed, see Gnits for more information.

**`--libdir=*dir*` ¶**

Look for Automake data files in directory *dir* instead of in the installation directory. This is typically used for debugging.

The environment variable `AUTOMAKE_LIBDIR` provides another way to set the directory containing Automake data files. The --libdir option takes precedence over it.

**`--print-libdir` ¶**

Print the path of the installation directory containing Automake-provided scripts and data files (e.g., texinfo.texi and install-sh).

**`-c` ¶**

**`--copy`**

When used with --add-missing, causes installed files to be copied. The default is to make a symbolic link.

**`-f` ¶**

**`--force-missing`**

When used with --add-missing, causes standard files to be reinstalled even if they already exist in the source tree. This involves removing the file from the source tree before creating the new symlink (or, with --copy, copying the new file).

**`--foreign` ¶**

Set the global strictness to foreign. For more information, see Strictness.

**`--gnits` ¶**

Set the global strictness to gnits. For more information, see Strictness.

**`--gnu` ¶**

Set the global strictness to gnu. For more information, see Strictness. This is the default strictness.

**`--help` ¶**

Print a summary of the command line options and exit.

**`-i` ¶**

**`--ignore-deps`**

This disables the dependency tracking feature in generated Makefiles; see Automatic dependency tracking.

**`--include-deps` ¶**

This enables the dependency tracking feature. This feature is enabled by default. This option is provided for historical reasons only and probably should not be used.

**`--no-force` ¶**

Ordinarily `automake` creates all Makefile.ins mentioned in configure.ac. This option causes it to only update those Makefile.ins that are out of date with respect to one of their dependents.

**`-o *dir*` ¶**

**`--output-dir=*dir*`**

Put the generated Makefile.in in the directory *dir*. Ordinarily each Makefile.in is created in the directory of the corresponding Makefile.am. This option is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

**`-v` ¶**

**`--verbose`**

Cause Automake to print information about which files are being read or created.

**`--version` ¶**

Print the version number of Automake and exit.

**`-W *category*[,*category*...]` ¶**

**`--warnings=*category*[,*category*...]`**

Output warnings about a *category* of potential problems with the package. *category* can be any of:

**`cross`**

Constructs compromising the ability to cross-compile the package.

**`gnu`**

Minor deviations from the GNU Coding Standards (see *The GNU Coding Standards*).

**`obsolete`**

Obsolete features or constructions.

**`override`**

Redefinitions of Automake rules or variables.

**`portability`**

Portability issues (e.g., use of `make` features that are known to be not portable).

**`portability-recursive`**

Recursive, or nested, Make variable expansions (`$(foo$(x))`). These are not universally supported, but are more portable than the other non-portable constructs diagnosed by -Wportability. These warnings are turned on by -Wportability but can then be turned off specifically by -Wno-portability-recursive.

**`extra-portability`**

Extra portability issues, related to rarely-used tools such as the Microsoft `lib` archiver.

**`syntax`**

Questionable syntax, unused variables, typos, etc.

**`unsupported`**

Unsupported or incomplete features.

**`all`**

Turn on all the above categories of warnings.

**`none`**

Turn off all the above categories of warnings.

**`error`**

Treat warnings as errors.

A category can be turned off by prefixing its name with ‘no-’. For instance, -Wno-syntax will hide the warnings about unused variables.

Warnings in the ‘gnu’, ‘obsolete’, ‘portability’, ‘syntax’, and ‘unsupported’ categories are turned on by default. The ‘gnu’ and ‘portability’ categories are turned off in --foreign strictness.

Turning off ‘portability’ will also turn off ‘extra-portability’, and similarly turning on ‘extra-portability’ will also turn on ‘portability’. However, turning on ‘portability’ or turning off ‘extra-portability’ will not affect the other category.

Unknown warning categories supplied as an argument to -W will themselves produce a warning, in the ‘unsupported’ category. This warning is never treated as an error.

The environment variable `WARNINGS` can contain a comma separated list of categories to enable. -W settings on the command line take precedence; for instance, -Wnone also turns off any warning categories enabled by `WARNINGS`.

Unknown warning categories named in `WARNINGS` are silently ignored.

If the environment variable `AUTOMAKE_JOBS` contains a positive number, it is taken as the maximum number of Perl threads to use in `automake` for generating multiple Makefile.in files concurrently. This is an experimental feature.
