---
title: "automake (part 3/14)"
source: https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html
domain: gnu-autotools
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: gnu autotools, autoconf configure, automake build, build automation
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 3/14
---

## 6 Scanning configure.ac, using `aclocal`

Automake scans the package’s configure.ac to determine certain information about the package. Some `autoconf` macros are required and some variables must be defined in configure.ac. Automake will also use information from configure.ac to further tailor its output.

Automake also supplies some Autoconf macros to make the maintenance easier. These macros can automatically be put into your aclocal.m4 using the `aclocal` program.

### 6.1 Configuration requirements

The one real requirement of Automake is that your configure.ac call `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`. This macro does several things that are required for proper Automake operation (see Autoconf macros supplied with Automake).

Here are the other macros that Automake requires but which are not run by `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`:

**`AC_CONFIG_FILES` ¶**

**`AC_OUTPUT`**

These two macros are usually invoked as follows near the end of configure.ac.

```
...
AC_CONFIG_FILES([
  Makefile
  doc/Makefile
  src/Makefile
  src/lib/Makefile
  ...
])
AC_OUTPUT
```

Automake uses these to determine which files to create (see Creating Output Files in *The Autoconf Manual*). A listed file is considered to be an Automake generated Makefile if there exists a file with the same name and the .am extension appended. Typically, ‘AC_CONFIG_FILES([foo/Makefile])’ will cause Automake to generate foo/Makefile.in if foo/Makefile.am exists.

When using `AC_CONFIG_FILES` with multiple input files, as in

```
AC_CONFIG_FILES([Makefile:top.in:Makefile.in:bot.in])
```

`automake` will generate the first .in input file for which a .am file exists. If no such file exists the output file is not considered to be generated by Automake.

Files created by `AC_CONFIG_FILES`, be they Automake Makefiles or not, are all removed by ‘make distclean’. Their inputs are automatically distributed, unless they are the output of prior `AC_CONFIG_FILES` commands. Finally, rebuild rules are generated in the Automake Makefile existing in the subdirectory of the output file, if there is one, or in the top-level Makefile otherwise.

The above machinery (cleaning, distributing, and rebuilding) works fine if the `AC_CONFIG_FILES` specifications contain only literals. If part of the specification uses shell variables, `automake` will not be able to fulfill this setup, and you will have to complete the missing bits by hand. For instance, on

```
file=input
...
AC_CONFIG_FILES([output:$file],, [file=$file])
```

`automake` will output rules to clean output, and rebuild it. However the rebuild rule will not depend on input, and this file will not be distributed either. (You must add ‘EXTRA_DIST = input’ to your Makefile.am if input is a source file.)

Similarly

```
file=output
file2=out:in
...
AC_CONFIG_FILES([$file:input],, [file=$file])
AC_CONFIG_FILES([$file2],, [file2=$file2])
```

will only cause input to be distributed. No file will be cleaned automatically (add ‘DISTCLEANFILES = output out’ yourself), and no rebuild rule will be output.

Obviously `automake` cannot guess what value ‘$file’ is going to hold later when configure is run, and it cannot use the shell variable ‘$file’ in a Makefile. However, if you make reference to ‘$file’ as ‘${file}’ (i.e., in a way that is compatible with `make`’s syntax) and furthermore use `AC_SUBST` to ensure that ‘${file}’ is meaningful in a Makefile, then `automake` will be able to use ‘${file}’ to generate all of these rules. For instance, here is how the Automake package itself generates versioned scripts for its test suite:

```
AC_SUBST([APIVERSION], ...)
...
AC_CONFIG_FILES(
  [tests/aclocal-${APIVERSION}:tests/aclocal.in],
  [chmod +x tests/aclocal-${APIVERSION}],
  [APIVERSION=$APIVERSION])
AC_CONFIG_FILES(
  [tests/automake-${APIVERSION}:tests/automake.in],
  [chmod +x tests/automake-${APIVERSION}])
```

Here cleaning, distributing, and rebuilding are done automatically, because ‘${APIVERSION}’ is known at `make`-time.

Note that you should not use shell variables to declare Makefile files for which `automake` must create Makefile.in. Even `AC_SUBST` does not help here, because `automake` needs to know the file name when it runs in order to check whether Makefile.am exists. (In the very hairy case that your setup requires such use of variables, you will have to tell Automake which Makefile.ins to generate on the command-line.)

It is possible to let `automake` emit conditional rules for `AC_CONFIG_FILES` with the help of `AM_COND_IF` (see Other things Automake recognizes).

To summarize:

- Use literals for Makefiles, and for other files whenever possible.
- Use ‘$file’ (or ‘${file}’ without ‘AC_SUBST([file])’) for files that `automake` should ignore.
- Use ‘${file}’ and ‘AC_SUBST([file])’ for files that `automake` should not ignore.

### 6.2 Other things Automake recognizes

Every time Automake is run it calls Autoconf to trace configure.ac. This way it can recognize the use of certain macros and tailor the generated Makefile.in appropriately. Currently recognized macros and their effects are:

**`AC_CANONICAL_BUILD` ¶**

**`AC_CANONICAL_HOST` ¶**

**`AC_CANONICAL_TARGET` ¶**

Automake will ensure that config.guess and config.sub exist. Also, the Makefile variables `build_triplet`, `host_triplet` and `target_triplet` are introduced. See Getting the Canonical System Type in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` ¶**

Automake will look for various helper scripts, such as install-sh, in the directory named in this macro invocation. (The full list of scripts is: ar-lib, config.guess, config.sub, depcomp, compile, install-sh, ltmain.sh, mdate-sh, missing, mkinstalldirs, py-compile, test-driver, texinfo.tex, ylwrap.) Not all scripts are always searched for; some scripts will only be sought if the generated Makefile.in requires them.

If `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` is used, it must be given before the call to `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`; Automake will warn about this if it is not so. All other `AC_CONFIG_...` macros are conventionally called after `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`, though they may or may not work in other locations, with or without warnings.

If `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` is not given, the scripts are looked for in their standard locations. For mdate-sh, texinfo.tex, and ylwrap, the standard location is the source directory corresponding to the current Makefile.am. For the rest, the standard location is the first one of ., .., or ../.. (relative to the top source directory) that provides any one of the helper scripts. See Finding ‘configure’ Input in *The Autoconf Manual*.

Required files from `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` are automatically distributed, even if there is no Makefile.am in this directory.

**`AC_CONFIG_LIBOBJ_DIR` ¶**

Automake will require the sources file declared with `AC_LIBSOURCE` (see below) in the directory specified by this macro.

**`AC_CONFIG_HEADERS` ¶**

Automake will generate rules to rebuild these headers from the corresponding templates (usually, the template for a foo.h header being foo.h.in).

As with `AC_CONFIG_FILES` (see Configuration requirements), parts of the specification using shell variables will be ignored as far as cleaning, distributing, and rebuilding is concerned.

Older versions of Automake required the use of `AM_CONFIG_HEADER`; this is no longer the case, and that macro has indeed been removed.

**`AC_CONFIG_LINKS` ¶**

Automake will generate rules to remove configure generated links on ‘make distclean’ and to distribute named source files as part of ‘make dist’.

As with `AC_CONFIG_FILES` (see Configuration requirements), parts of the specification using shell variables will be ignored as far as cleaning and distributing is concerned. (There are no rebuild rules for links.)

**`AC_LIBOBJ` ¶**

**`AC_LIBSOURCE` ¶**

**`AC_LIBSOURCES` ¶**

Automake will automatically distribute any file listed in `AC_LIBSOURCE` or `AC_LIBSOURCES`.

Note that the `AC_LIBOBJ` macro calls `AC_LIBSOURCE`. So if an Autoconf macro is documented to call ‘AC_LIBOBJ([file])’, then file.c will be distributed automatically by Automake. This encompasses many macros like `AC_FUNC_ALLOCA`, `AC_FUNC_MEMCMP`, `AC_REPLACE_FUNCS`, and others.

By the way, direct assignments to `LIBOBJS` are no longer supported. You should always use `AC_LIBOBJ` for this purpose. See `AC_LIBOBJ` vs. `LIBOBJS` in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_RANLIB` ¶**

This is required if any libraries are built in the package. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_CXX` ¶**

This is required if any C++ source is included. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_OBJC` ¶**

This is required if any Objective C source is included. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_OBJCXX` ¶**

This is required if any Objective C++ source is included. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_F77` ¶**

This is required if any Fortran 77 source is included. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_F77_LIBRARY_LDFLAGS` ¶**

This is required for programs and shared libraries that are a mixture of languages that include Fortran 77 (see Mixing Fortran 77 With C and C++). See Autoconf macros supplied with Automake.

**`AC_FC_SRCEXT` ¶**

Automake will add the flags computed by `AC_FC_SRCEXT` to compilation of files with the respective source extension (see Fortran Compiler Characteristics in *The Autoconf Manual*).

**`AC_PROG_FC` ¶**

This is required if any Fortran 90/95 source is included. This macro is distributed with Autoconf version 2.58 and later. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_PROG_LIBTOOL` ¶**

**`LT_INIT` ¶**

Automake will turn on processing for `libtool` (see Introduction in *The Libtool Manual*).

**`AC_PROG_YACC` ¶**

If a Yacc source file is seen, then you must either use this macro or define the variable `YACC` in configure.ac. The former is preferred (see Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*).

**`AC_PROG_LEX` ¶**

If a Lex source file is seen, then this macro must be used. See Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_REQUIRE_AUX_FILE` ¶**

For each `AC_REQUIRE_AUX_FILE([*file*])`, `automake` will ensure that *file* exists in the aux directory, and will complain otherwise. It will also automatically distribute the file. This macro should be used by third-party Autoconf macros that require some supporting files in the aux directory specified with `AC_CONFIG_AUX_DIR` above. See Finding `configure` Input in *The Autoconf Manual*.

**`AC_SUBST` ¶**

The first argument is automatically defined as a variable in each generated Makefile.in, unless `AM_SUBST_NOTMAKE` is also used for this variable. See Setting Output Variables in *The Autoconf Manual*.

For every substituted variable *var*, `automake` will add a line `*var* = *value*` to each Makefile.in file. Many Autoconf macros invoke `AC_SUBST` to set output variables this way, e.g., `AC_PATH_XTRA` defines `X_CFLAGS` and `X_LIBS`. Thus, you can access these variables as `$(X_CFLAGS)` and `$(X_LIBS)` in any Makefile.am if `AC_PATH_XTRA` is called.

**`AM_CONDITIONAL` ¶**

This introduces an Automake conditional (see Conditionals).

**`AM_COND_IF` ¶**

This macro allows `automake` to detect subsequent access within configure.ac to a conditional previously introduced with `AM_CONDITIONAL`, thus enabling conditional `AC_CONFIG_FILES` (see Usage of Conditionals).

**`AM_GNU_GETTEXT` ¶**

This macro is required for packages that use GNU gettext (see Gettext). It is distributed with gettext. If Automake sees this macro it ensures that the package meets some of gettext’s requirements.

**`AM_GNU_GETTEXT_INTL_SUBDIR` ¶**

This macro specifies that the intl/ subdirectory is to be built, even if the `AM_GNU_GETTEXT` macro was invoked with a first argument of ‘external’.

**`AM_MAINTAINER_MODE([*default-mode*])` ¶**

This macro adds an --enable-maintainer-mode option to `configure`. If this is used, `automake` will cause “maintainer-only” rules to be turned off by default in the generated Makefile.ins, unless *default-mode* is ‘enable’. This macro defines the `MAINTAINER_MODE` conditional, which you can use in your own Makefile.am. See `missing` and `AM_MAINTAINER_MODE`.

**`AM_SUBST_NOTMAKE(*var*)` ¶**

Prevent Automake from defining a variable *var*, even if it is substituted by `config.status`. Normally, Automake defines a `make` variable for each `configure` substitution, i.e., for each `AC_SUBST([*var*])`. This macro prevents that definition from Automake. If `AC_SUBST` has not been called for this variable, then `AM_SUBST_NOTMAKE` has no effects. Preventing variable definitions may be useful for substitution of multi-line values, where `*var* = @*value*@` might yield unintended results.

**`m4_include` ¶**

Files included by configure.ac using this macro will be detected by Automake and automatically distributed. They will also appear as dependencies in Makefile rules.

`m4_include` is seldom used by configure.ac authors, but can appear in aclocal.m4 when `aclocal` detects that some required macros come from files local to your package (as opposed to macros installed in a system-wide directory; see Auto-generating aclocal.m4: Invoking `aclocal`).

### 6.3 Auto-generating aclocal.m4: Invoking `aclocal`

Automake includes a number of Autoconf macros that can be used in your package (see Autoconf macros supplied with Automake); some of them are required by Automake in certain situations. These macros must be defined in your aclocal.m4; otherwise they will not be seen by `autoconf`.

The `aclocal` program will automatically generate aclocal.m4 files based on the contents of configure.ac. This provides a convenient way to get Automake-provided macros, without having to search around. The `aclocal` mechanism allows other packages to supply their own macros (see Writing your own aclocal macros). You can also use it to maintain your own set of custom macros (see Handling Local Macros).

At startup, `aclocal` scans all the .m4 files it can find, looking for macro definitions (see Macro Search Path). Then it scans configure.ac. Any mention of one of the macros found in the first step causes that macro, and any macros it in turn requires, to be put into aclocal.m4.

*Putting* the file that contains the macro definition into aclocal.m4 is usually done by copying the entire text of this file, including unused macro definitions as well as both ‘#’ and ‘dnl’ comments. If you want to make a comment that will be completely ignored by `aclocal`, use ‘##’ as the comment leader.

When a file selected by `aclocal` is located in a subdirectory specified as a relative search path with `aclocal`’s -I argument, `aclocal` assumes the file belongs to the package and uses `m4_include` instead of copying it into aclocal.m4. This makes the package smaller, eases dependency tracking, and causes the file to be distributed automatically. (See Handling Local Macros, for an example.) Any macro that is found in a system-wide directory or via an absolute search path will be copied. So use ‘-I `pwd`/reldir’ instead of ‘-I reldir’ whenever a relative directory should be considered to be outside the package.

The contents of acinclude.m4, if this file exists, are also automatically included in aclocal.m4. We mostly recommend against using acinclude.m4 in new packages (see Handling Local Macros).

While computing aclocal.m4, `aclocal` runs `autom4te` (see Using `Autom4te` in *The Autoconf Manual*) in order to trace the macros that are used, and omit from aclocal.m4 all macros that are mentioned but otherwise unexpanded (this can happen when a macro is called conditionally). `autom4te` is expected to be in the `PATH`, just like `autoconf`. Its location can be overridden using the `AUTOM4TE` environment variable.

In practice it is usually simpler to run `autoreconf` instead of worrying about the required order of the various tools (see Using `autoreconf` in *The Autoconf Manual*).

This section explains the details of `aclocal`.

#### 6.3.1 aclocal Options

`aclocal` accepts the following options:

**`--automake-acdir=*dir*` ¶**

Look for Automake-provided macro files in *dir* instead of in the installation directory. This is typically used for debugging.

If this option is not specified, the value of the environment variable `ACLOCAL_AUTOMAKE_DIR`, if set, is used to set the directory containing Automake-provided macro files. Otherwise an install-time default is used.

**`--aclocal-path=*path*` ¶**

Look for local third-party macro files (and the special dirlist file, see dirlist) along *path* (a colon-separated list of directories) instead of in the installation directory. (This can be used for building against alternative system roots (“sysroots”) for finding headers and libraries.)

If this option is not specified, the value of the environment variable `ACLOCAL_PATH`, if set, is used to set the search path containing local third-party macro files. Otherwise an install-time default is used.

**`--system-acdir=*dir*` ¶**

Look for the system-wide third-party macro files (and the special dirlist file) in *dir* instead of in the installation directory. This is typically used for debugging.

**`--diff[=*command*]` ¶**

Run *command* on the M4 file that would be installed or overwritten by --install. The default *command* is ‘diff -u’. This option implies --install and --dry-run.

**`--dry-run` ¶**

Do not overwrite (or create) aclocal.m4 and M4 files installed by --install.

**`--help` ¶**

Print a summary of the command line options and exit successfully.

**`-I *dir*` ¶**

Add the directory *dir* to the list of directories searched for .m4 files.

**`--install` ¶**

Install system-wide third-party macros into the first directory specified with ‘-I *dir*’ instead of copying them into the output file. This is also done if *dir* is an absolute path.

When this option is used, and only when this option is used, `aclocal` will also honor ‘#serial *number*’ lines that appear in macros: an M4 file is ignored if there exists another M4 file with the same basename and a greater serial number in the search path (see Serial Numbers).

**`--force` ¶**

Always overwrite the output file. The default is to overwrite the output file only when needed, i.e., when its contents change or if one of its dependencies is younger.

This option forces the update of aclocal.m4 (or the file specified with --output below) and only this file; it has no influence on files that may need to be installed by --install.

**`--output=*file*` ¶**

Cause the output to be put into *file* instead of aclocal.m4.

**`--print-ac-dir` ¶**

Print the name of the directory that `aclocal` will search to find third-party .m4 files. When this option is given, normal processing is suppressed. This option was used *in the past* by third-party packages to determine where to install .m4 macro files, but *this usage is today discouraged*, since it causes ‘$(prefix)’ not to be thoroughly honored (violating the GNU Coding Standards). And similar semantics can be better obtained with the `ACLOCAL_PATH` environment variable (see Writing your own aclocal macros).

**`--verbose` ¶**

Print the names of files examined.

**`--version` ¶**

Print the version number of Automake and exit successfully.

**`-W CATEGORY`**

**`--warnings=*category*` ¶**

Output warnings falling in *category*, one of:

**`syntax`**

dubious syntactic constructs, underquoted macros, unused macros, etc.

**`unsupported`**

unknown macros.

**`all`**

all the warnings; this is the default.

**`none`**

turn off all the warnings.

**`no-*category*`**

turn off warnings in *category*.

**`error`**

treat warnings as errors.

All warnings are output by default.

The environment variable `WARNINGS` is honored in the same way as it is for `automake` (see Creating a Makefile.in: Invoking `automake`).

#### 6.3.3 Writing your own aclocal macros

The `aclocal` program doesn’t have built-in knowledge of any macros. You can extend it with your own macros.

Libraries, for example, usually want to supply their own Autoconf macros for use by other programs. For instance, the `gettext` library supplies a macro `AM_GNU_GETTEXT` that should be used by any package using `gettext`. When the library is installed, it installs this macro so that `aclocal` will find it.

A macro file’s name should end in .m4. Such files should be installed in $(datadir)/aclocal. This can be done with:

```
aclocaldir = $(datadir)/aclocal
aclocal_DATA = mymacro.m4 myothermacro.m4
```

Please do use $(datadir)/aclocal, and not something based on the result of ‘aclocal --print-ac-dir’ (see Installing to Hard-Coded Locations, for arguments). It might also be helpful to suggest to the user to add the $(datadir)/aclocal directory to their `ACLOCAL_PATH` variable (see ACLOCAL_PATH) so that `aclocal` will find the .m4 files installed by your package automatically.

A file of macros should be a series of properly quoted `AC_DEFUN`’s (see Macro Definitions in *The Autoconf Manual*). The `aclocal` program also understands `AC_REQUIRE` (see Prerequisite Macros in *The Autoconf Manual*), so it is safe to put each macro in a separate file. Each file should have no side effects except for defining the macro(s). In particular, any call to `AC_PREREQ` should be done inside the defined macro, not at the beginning of the file.

Starting with Automake 1.8, `aclocal` warns about all underquoted calls to `AC_DEFUN`. We realize this annoys some people, because `aclocal` was not so strict in the past and many third party macros are underquoted; and we have to apologize for this temporary inconvenience. The reason we have to be stricter is that a possible future implementation of `aclocal` (see The Future of `aclocal`) will have to temporarily include all of these third party .m4 files, maybe several times, even including files that end up not being needed. Doing so should alleviate many problems of the current implementation; however, it requires a stricter style from macro authors. Hopefully it is easy to revise the existing macros. For instance,

```
# bad style
AC_PREREQ(2.68)
AC_DEFUN(AX_FOOBAR,
[AC_REQUIRE([AX_SOMETHING])dnl
AX_FOO
AX_BAR
])
```

should be rewritten as

```
AC_DEFUN([AX_FOOBAR],
[AC_PREREQ([2.68])dnl
AC_REQUIRE([AX_SOMETHING])dnl
AX_FOO
AX_BAR
])
```

Wrapping the `AC_PREREQ([2.68])` call inside the macro ensures that the Autoconf 2.68 will not be a prerequisite if `AX_FOOBAR` is not used. Most importantly, quoting the first argument of `AC_DEFUN` allows the macro to be redefined or included twice (otherwise this first argument would be expanded during the second definition). For consistency we like to quote even arguments such as `2.68` that do not require it.

If you have been directed here by the `aclocal` diagnostic but are not the maintainer of the implicated macro, you will want to contact the maintainer of that macro. Please try to make sure you have the latest version of the macro and that the problem hasn’t already been reported before doing so.

Another situation where `aclocal` is commonly used is to manage macros that are used locally by the package; Handling Local Macros.

#### 6.3.4 Handling Local Macros

Feature tests offered by Autoconf do not cover all needs. People often have to supplement existing tests with their own macros, or with third-party macros.

There are two ways to organize custom macros in a package.

The first possibility (the historical practice) is to list all your macros in acinclude.m4. This file will be included in aclocal.m4 when you run `aclocal`, and its macro(s) will henceforth be visible to `autoconf`. However, if it contains numerous macros, it will rapidly become difficult to maintain, and it will be almost impossible to share macros between packages.

The second possibility, which we recommend, is to write each macro in its own file and gather all these files in a directory. This directory is usually called m4/. Then you can update configure.ac by adding a proper call to `AC_CONFIG_MACRO_DIRS`:

```
AC_CONFIG_MACRO_DIRS([m4])
```

`aclocal` will then take care of automatically adding m4/ to its search path for M4 files.

When `aclocal` is run, it will build an aclocal.m4 that `m4_include`s any file from m4/ that defines a required macro. Macros not found locally will still be searched in system-wide directories, as explained in Macro Search Path.

Custom macros should be distributed for the same reason that configure.ac is: so that other people have all the sources of your package if they want to work on it. In fact, this distribution happens automatically because all `m4_include`d files are distributed.

There is no consensus on the distribution of third-party macros that your package may use. Many libraries install their own macro in the system-wide `aclocal` directory (see Writing your own aclocal macros). For instance, Guile ships with a file called guile.m4 that contains the macro `GUILE_FLAGS` that can be used to define compiler and linker flags appropriate for using Guile. Using `GUILE_FLAGS` in configure.ac will cause `aclocal` to copy guile.m4 into aclocal.m4, but as guile.m4 is not part of the project, it will not be distributed. Technically, that means a user who needs to rebuild aclocal.m4 will have to install Guile first. This is probably OK, if Guile already is a requirement to build the package. However, if Guile is only an optional feature, or if your package might run on architectures where Guile cannot be installed, this requirement will hinder development. An easy solution is to copy such third-party macros in your local m4/ directory so they get distributed.

Since Automake 1.10, `aclocal` offers the option `--install` to copy these system-wide third-party macros in your local macro directory, helping to solve the above problem.

With this setup, system-wide macros will be copied to m4/ the first time you run `aclocal`. Then the locally installed macros will have precedence over the system-wide installed macros each time `aclocal` is run again.

One reason why you should keep --install in the flags even after the first run is that when you later edit configure.ac and depend on a new macro, this macro will be installed in your m4/ automatically. Another one is that serial numbers (see Serial Numbers) can be used to update the macros in your source tree automatically when new system-wide versions are installed. It is good practice to maintain a serial number for each macro you distribute, even if you do not use the --install option of `aclocal`: this allows other people to use it.

#### 6.3.5 Serial Numbers

Because third-party macros defined in *.m4 files are naturally shared between multiple projects, people like to version them. This makes it easier to tell which of two M4 files is newer. Since at least 1996, the convention is to use a ‘#serial’ line for this.

Such a serial number should be a single line of the form

```
# serial version
```

where *version* is a version number containing only digits and dots. Usually people use a single integer, and they increment it each time they change the macro (hence the name of “serial”). Such a line should appear in the M4 file before any macro definition.

The ‘#’ must be the first character on the line, and it is OK to have extra words after the version, as in

```
#serial version garbage
```

Normally these serial numbers are completely ignored by `aclocal` and `autoconf`, like any genuine comment. However when using `aclocal`’s --install feature, these serial numbers will modify the way `aclocal` selects the macros to install in the package: if two files with the same basename exist in your search path, and if at least one of them uses a ‘#serial’ line, `aclocal` will ignore the file that has the older ‘#serial’ line (or the file that has none).

A serial number applies to a whole M4 file, not to any macro it contains. A file can contain multiple macros, but only one serial number.

#### Serial Number Example

Here is a use case that illustrates the use of --install and its interaction with serial numbers. Let’s assume we maintain a package called MyPackage, the configure.ac of which requires a third-party macro `AX_THIRD_PARTY` defined in /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 as follows:

```
# serial 1
AC_DEFUN([AX_THIRD_PARTY], [...])
```

MyPackage uses an m4/ directory to store local macros as explained in Handling Local Macros, and has

```
AC_CONFIG_MACRO_DIRS([m4])
```

in its configure.ac.

Initially the m4/ directory is empty. The first time we run `aclocal --install`, it will notice that

- configure.ac uses `AX_THIRD_PARTY`
- No local macros define `AX_THIRD_PARTY`
- /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 defines `AX_THIRD_PARTY` with serial number 1.

Because /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 is a system-wide macro and `aclocal` was given the --install option, it will copy this file in m4/thirdparty.m4, and output an aclocal.m4 that contains ‘m4_include([m4/thirdparty.m4])’.

The next time ‘aclocal --install’ is run, something different happens. `aclocal` notices that

- configure.ac uses `AX_THIRD_PARTY`
- m4/thirdparty.m4 defines `AX_THIRD_PARTY` with serial number 1.
- /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 defines `AX_THIRD_PARTY` with serial number 1.

Because both files have the same serial number, `aclocal` uses the first it found in its search path order (see Macro Search Path). `aclocal` therefore ignores /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 and outputs an aclocal.m4 that contains ‘m4_include([m4/thirdparty.m4])’.

Local directories specified with -I are always searched before system-wide directories, so a local file will always be preferred to the system-wide file in case of equal serial numbers.

Now suppose the system-wide third-party macro is changed. This can happen if the package installing this macro is updated. Let’s suppose the new macro has serial number 2. The next time ‘aclocal --install’ is run the situation is the following:

- configure.ac uses `AX_THIRD_PARTY`
- m4/thirdparty.m4 defines `AX_THIRD_PARTY` with serial number 1.
- /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 defines `AX_THIRD_PARTY` with serial 2.

When `aclocal` sees a greater serial number, it immediately forgets anything it knows from files that have the same basename and a smaller serial number. So after it has found /usr/share/aclocal/thirdparty.m4 with serial 2, `aclocal` will proceed as if it had never seen m4/thirdparty.m4. This brings us back to a situation similar to that at the beginning of our example, where no local file defined the macro. `aclocal` will install the new version of the macro in m4/thirdparty.m4, in this case overriding the old version. MyPackage just had its macro updated as a side effect of running `aclocal`.

If you are leery of letting `aclocal` update your local macro, you can run ‘aclocal --diff’ to review the changes ‘aclocal --install’ would perform on these macros.

Finally, note that the --force option of `aclocal` has no effect on the files installed by --install. For instance, if you have modified your local macros, do not expect --install --force to replace the local macros by their system-wide versions. If you want to do so, simply erase the local macros you want to revert, and run ‘aclocal --install’.

#### 6.3.6 The Future of `aclocal`

Ideally, `aclocal` should not be part of Automake. Automake should focus on generating Makefiles; dealing with M4 macros is more Autoconf’s job. The fact that some people install Automake just to use `aclocal`, but do not use Automake otherwise, is an indication of how that feature is misplaced.

A new implementation would probably be done slightly differently. For instance, it could enforce the m4/-style layout discussed in Handling Local Macros.

We do not know when or whether this will happen. It has been discussed several times, but someone still has to commit to executing this non-trivial task.

From the user’s point of view, `aclocal`’s removal might turn out to be painful. There is a simple precaution that you may take to make that switch more seamless: never call `aclocal` yourself. Keep its invocation under the exclusive control of `autoreconf` and Automake’s rebuild rules. Hopefully you won’t need to worry about things breaking; when `aclocal` disappears, because everything will have been taken care of. If otherwise you used to call `aclocal` directly yourself or from some script, you will quickly notice the change.

Many packages come with a script called bootstrap or autogen.sh that calls `aclocal`, `libtoolize`, `gettextize` or `autopoint`, `autoconf`, `autoheader`, and `automake` in the right order. In fact, this is precisely what `autoreconf` can do for you. If your package has such a bootstrap or autogen.sh script, consider using `autoreconf`. That should simplify its logic (all to the good), and more to the point you will not call `aclocal` directly anymore.

For the time being, third-party packages should continue to install public macros into /usr/share/aclocal/. If `aclocal` is replaced by another tool it might make sense to rename the directory, but supporting /usr/share/aclocal/ for backward compatibility should be feasible, provided all macros are properly written (see Writing your own aclocal macros).

### 6.4 Autoconf macros supplied with Automake

Automake ships with several Autoconf macros that you can use from your configure.ac. When you use one of them it will be included by `aclocal` in aclocal.m4.

#### 6.4.1 Public Macros

**`AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([*options*])` ¶**

Runs many macros required for proper operation of the generated Makefiles.

Today, `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` is called with a single argument: a space-separated list of Automake options that should be applied to every Makefile.am in the tree. The effect is as if each option were listed in `AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS` (see Changing Automake’s Behavior).

This macro can also be called in another, *deprecated* form: `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE(PACKAGE, VERSION, [NO-DEFINE])`. In this form, there are two required arguments: the package and the version number. This usage is mostly obsolete because the *package* and *version* can be obtained from Autoconf’s `AC_INIT` macro. However, differently from what happens for `AC_INIT` invocations, this `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` invocation supports shell variables’ expansions in the `PACKAGE` and `VERSION` arguments (which otherwise defaults, respectively, to the `PACKAGE_TARNAME` and `PACKAGE_VERSION` defined via the `AC_INIT` invocation; see The `AC_INIT` macro in *The Autoconf Manual*); and this can still be useful in some selected situations. Our hope is that future Autoconf versions will improve their support for package versions defined dynamically at configure runtime; when (and if) this happens, support for the two-args `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` invocation will likely be removed from Automake.

If your configure.ac has:

```
AC_INIT([src/foo.c])
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([mumble], [1.5])
```

you should modernize it as follows:

```
AC_INIT([mumble], [1.5])
AC_CONFIG_SRCDIR([src/foo.c])
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE
```

Note that if you’re upgrading your configure.ac from an earlier version of Automake, it is not always correct to simply move the package and version arguments from `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE` directly to `AC_INIT`, as in the example above. The first argument to `AC_INIT` should be the name of your package (e.g., ‘GNU Automake’), not the tarball name (e.g., ‘automake’) that you used to pass to `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`. Autoconf tries to derive a tarball name from the package name, which should work for most but not all package names. (If it doesn’t work for yours, you can use the four-argument form of `AC_INIT` to provide the tarball name explicitly).

By default this macro `AC_DEFINE`’s `PACKAGE` and `VERSION`. This can be avoided by passing the no-define option (see List of Automake options):

```
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([no-define ...])
```

**`AM_PATH_LISPDIR` ¶**

Searches for the program `emacs`, and, if found, sets the output variable `lispdir` to the full path to Emacs’ site-lisp directory.

Note that this test assumes the `emacs` found to be a version that supports Emacs Lisp (such as GNU Emacs or XEmacs). Other emacsen can cause this test to hang (some, like old versions of MicroEmacs, start up in interactive mode, requiring C-x C-c to exit, which is hardly obvious for a non-emacs user). In most cases, however, you should be able to use C-c to kill the test. In order to avoid problems, you can set `EMACS` to “no” in the environment, or use the --with-lispdir option to `configure` to explicitly set the correct path (if you’re sure you have an `emacs` that supports Emacs Lisp).

**`AM_PROG_AR([*act-if-fail*])` ¶**

You must use this macro when you use the archiver in your project, if you want support for unusual archivers such as Microsoft `lib`. The content of the optional argument is executed if the archiver interface is not recognized; the default action is to abort configure with an error message.

**`AM_PROG_AS` ¶**

Use this macro when you have assembly code in your project. This will choose the assembler for you (by default the C compiler) and set `CCAS`, and will also set `CCASFLAGS` if required.

**`AM_PROG_CC_C_O` ¶**

This is an obsolescent macro that checks that the C compiler supports the -c and -o options together. Note that, since Automake 1.14, the `AC_PROG_CC` is rewritten to implement such checks itself, and thus the explicit use of `AM_PROG_CC_C_O` should no longer be required.

**`AM_PROG_LEX([*options*])` ¶**

Like `AC_PROG_LEX` (see Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*), but uses the `missing` script on systems that do not have `lex`. HP-UX 10 is one such system. *options* are passed directly to `AC_PROG_LEX`.

**`AM_PROG_GCJ` ¶**

This macro finds the `gcj` program or causes an error. It sets `GCJ` and `GCJFLAGS`. `gcj` is the Java front-end to the GNU Compiler Collection.

**`AM_PROG_UPC([*compiler-search-list*])` ¶**

Find a compiler for Unified Parallel C and define the `UPC` variable. The default *compiler-search-list* is ‘upcc upc’. This macro will abort `configure` if no Unified Parallel C compiler is found.

**`AM_MISSING_PROG(*name*, *program*)` ¶**

Find a maintainer tool *program* and define the *name* environment variable with its location. If *program* is not detected, then *name* will instead invoke the `missing` script, in order to give useful advice to the user about the missing maintainer tool. See `missing` and `AM_MAINTAINER_MODE`, for more information on when the `missing` script is appropriate.

**`AM_SILENT_RULES` ¶**

Control the machinery for less verbose build output (see How Automake can help in silencing Make).

**`AM_WITH_DMALLOC` ¶**

Add support for the Dmalloc package. If the user runs `configure` with --with-dmalloc, then define `WITH_DMALLOC` and add -ldmalloc to `LIBS`.

#### 6.4.2 Obsolete Macros

Although using some of the following macros was required in past releases, you should not use any of them in new code. *All these macros will be removed in the next major Automake version*; if you are still using them, running `autoupdate` should adjust your configure.ac automatically (see Using `autoupdate` to Modernize configure.ac in *The Autoconf Manual*). *Do it NOW!*

**`AM_PROG_MKDIR_P` ¶**

From Automake 1.8 to 1.9.6 this macro used to define the output variable `mkdir_p` to one of `mkdir -p`, `install-sh -d`, or `mkinstalldirs`.

Nowadays Autoconf provides a similar functionality with `AC_PROG_MKDIR_P` (see Particular Program Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*), however this defines the output variable `MKDIR_P` instead. In case you are still using the `AM_PROG_MKDIR_P` macro in your configure.ac, or its provided variable `$(mkdir_p)` in your Makefile.am, you are advised to switch ASAP to the more modern Autoconf-provided interface instead; both the macro and the variable might be removed in a future major Automake release.

#### 6.4.3 Private Macros

The following macros are private macros you should not call directly. They are called by the other public macros when appropriate. Do not rely on them, as they might be changed in a future version. Consider them as implementation details; or better, do not consider them at all: skip this section!

**`_AM_DEPENDENCIES` ¶**

**`AM_SET_DEPDIR` ¶**

**`AM_DEP_TRACK` ¶**

**`AM_OUTPUT_DEPENDENCY_COMMANDS` ¶**

These macros are used to implement Automake’s automatic dependency tracking scheme. They are called automatically by Automake when required, and there should be no need to invoke them manually.

**`AM_MAKE_INCLUDE` ¶**

This macro is used to discover how the user’s `make` handles `include` statements. This macro is automatically invoked when needed; there should be no need to invoke it manually.

**`AM_PROG_INSTALL_STRIP` ¶**

This is used to find a version of `install` that can be used to strip a program at installation time. This macro is automatically included when required.

**`AM_SANITY_CHECK` ¶**

This checks to make sure that a file created in the build directory is newer than a file in the source directory. This can fail on systems where the clock is set incorrectly. This macro is automatically run from `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`.
