---
title: "automake (part 5/14)"
source: https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html
domain: gnu-autotools
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: gnu autotools, autoconf configure, automake build, build automation
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 5/14
---

## 8 Building Programs and Libraries

A large part of Automake’s functionality is dedicated to making it easy to build programs and libraries.

### 8.1 Building a program

In order to build a program, you need to tell Automake which sources are part of it, and which libraries it should be linked with.

This section also covers conditional compilation of sources or programs. Most of the comments about these also apply to libraries (see Building a library) and libtool libraries (see Building a Shared Library).

#### 8.1.1 Defining program sources

In a directory containing source that gets built into a program (as opposed to a library or a script), the `PROGRAMS` primary is used. Programs can be installed in `bindir`, `sbindir`, `libexecdir`, `pkglibexecdir`, or not at all (`noinst_`). They can also be built only for ‘make check’, in which case the prefix is ‘check_’.

For instance:

```
bin_PROGRAMS = hello
```

In this simple case, the resulting Makefile.in will contain code to generate a program named `hello`.

Associated with each program are several assisting variables that are named after the program. These variables are all optional, and have reasonable defaults. Each variable, its use, and default is spelled out below; we use the “hello” example throughout.

The variable `hello_SOURCES` is used to specify which source files get built into an executable:

```
hello_SOURCES = hello.c version.c getopt.c getopt1.c getopt.h system.h
```

This causes each mentioned .c file to be compiled into the corresponding .o. Then all are linked to produce hello.

If `hello_SOURCES` is not specified, then it defaults to the single file hello.c (see Default `_SOURCES`).

Multiple programs can be built in a single directory. Multiple programs can share a single source file, which must be listed in each `_SOURCES` definition.

Header files listed in a `_SOURCES` definition will be included in the distribution but otherwise ignored. In case it isn’t obvious, you should not include the header file generated by configure in a `_SOURCES` variable; this file should not be distributed. Lex (.l) and Yacc (.y) files can also be listed; see Yacc and Lex support.

#### 8.1.2 Linking the program

If you need to link against libraries that are not found by `configure`, you can use `LDADD` to do so. This variable is used to specify additional objects or libraries to link with. Libraries to link with can be indicated either as file names or through `-L` and `-l` options.

For other linker options (not `-L` or `-l`), `LDADD` is inappropriate. You should use `AM_LDFLAGS` for this purpose.

Sometimes, multiple programs are built in one directory but do not share the same link-time requirements. In this case, you can use the `*prog*_LDADD` variable (where *prog* is the name of the program as it appears in some `_PROGRAMS` variable, and usually written in lowercase) to override `LDADD`. If this variable exists for a given program, then that program is not linked using `LDADD`.

For instance, in GNU cpio, `pax`, `cpio` and `mt` are linked against the library libcpio.a. However, `rmt` is built in the same directory, and has no such link requirement. Also, `mt` and `rmt` are only built on certain architectures. Here is what cpio’s src/Makefile.am looks like (abridged):

```
bin_PROGRAMS = cpio pax $(MT)
libexec_PROGRAMS = $(RMT)
EXTRA_PROGRAMS = mt rmt

LDADD = ../lib/libcpio.a $(INTLLIBS)
rmt_LDADD =

cpio_SOURCES = ...
pax_SOURCES = ...
mt_SOURCES = ...
rmt_SOURCES = ...
```

`*prog*_LDADD` is inappropriate for passing program-specific linker flags (except for -l, -L, -dlopen and -dlpreopen). So, use the `*prog*_LDFLAGS` variable for this purpose.

It is also occasionally useful to have a program depend on some other target that is not in fact part of that program. This can be done using either the `*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` or the `EXTRA_*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` variable. Each program depends on the contents both variables, but no further interpretation is done.

Since these dependencies are associated to the link rule used to create the programs they should normally list files used by the link command. That is *.$(OBJEXT), *.a, or *.la files. In rare cases you may need to add other kinds of files such as linker scripts, but *listing a source file in `_DEPENDENCIES` is wrong*. If some source file needs to be built before all the components of a program are built, consider using the `BUILT_SOURCES` variable instead (see Built Sources).

If `*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` is not supplied, it is computed by Automake. The automatically-assigned value is the contents of `*prog*_LDADD`, with most configure substitutions, -l, -L, -dlopen and -dlpreopen options removed. The configure substitutions that are left in are only ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’; these are left because it is known that they will not cause an invalid value for `*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` to be generated.

Conditional compilation of sources shows a situation where `_DEPENDENCIES` may be used.

The `EXTRA_*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` may be useful for cases where you merely want to augment the `automake`-generated `*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` rather than replacing it.

We recommend that you avoid using -l options in `LDADD` or `*prog*_LDADD` when referring to libraries built by your package. Instead, write the file name of the library explicitly as in the above `cpio` example. Use -l only to list third-party libraries. If you follow this rule, the default value of `*prog*_DEPENDENCIES` will list all your local libraries and omit the other ones.

#### 8.1.3 Conditional compilation of sources

You can’t put a configure substitution (e.g., ‘@FOO@’ or ‘$(FOO)’ where `FOO` is defined via `AC_SUBST`) into a `_SOURCES` variable. The reason for this is a bit hard to explain, but suffice to say that it simply won’t work. Automake will give an error if you try to do this.

Fortunately there are two other ways to achieve the same result. One is to use configure substitutions in `_LDADD` variables, the other is to use an Automake conditional.

#### Conditional Compilation using `_LDADD` Substitutions

Automake must know all the source files that could possibly go into a program, even if not all the files are built in every circumstance. Any files that are only conditionally built should be listed in the appropriate `EXTRA_` variable. For instance, if hello-linux.c or hello-generic.c were conditionally included in `hello`, the Makefile.am would contain:

```
bin_PROGRAMS = hello
hello_SOURCES = hello-common.c
EXTRA_hello_SOURCES = hello-linux.c hello-generic.c
hello_LDADD = $(HELLO_SYSTEM)
hello_DEPENDENCIES = $(HELLO_SYSTEM)
```

You can then set up the ‘$(HELLO_SYSTEM)’ substitution from configure.ac:

```
...
case $host in
  *linux*) HELLO_SYSTEM='hello-linux.$(OBJEXT)' ;;
  *)       HELLO_SYSTEM='hello-generic.$(OBJEXT)' ;;
esac
AC_SUBST([HELLO_SYSTEM])
...
```

In this case, the variable `HELLO_SYSTEM` should be replaced by either hello-linux.o or hello-generic.o, and added to both `hello_DEPENDENCIES` and `hello_LDADD` in order to be built and linked in.

#### Conditional Compilation using Automake Conditionals

An often simpler way to compile source files conditionally is to use Automake conditionals. For instance, you could use this Makefile.am construct to build the same hello example:

```
bin_PROGRAMS = hello
if LINUX
hello_SOURCES = hello-linux.c hello-common.c
else
hello_SOURCES = hello-generic.c hello-common.c
endif
```

In this case, configure.ac should set up the `LINUX` conditional using `AM_CONDITIONAL` (see Conditionals).

When using conditionals like this you don’t need to use the `EXTRA_` variable, because Automake will examine the contents of each variable to construct the complete list of source files.

If your program uses a lot of files, you will probably prefer a conditional ‘+=’.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = hello
hello_SOURCES = hello-common.c
if LINUX
hello_SOURCES += hello-linux.c
else
hello_SOURCES += hello-generic.c
endif
```

#### 8.1.4 Conditional compilation of programs

Sometimes it is useful to determine the programs that are to be built at configure time. For instance, GNU `cpio` only builds `mt` and `rmt` under special circumstances. The means to achieve conditional compilation of programs are the same you can use to compile source files conditionally: substitutions or conditionals.

#### Conditional Programs using `configure` Substitutions

In this case, you must notify Automake of all the programs that can possibly be built, but at the same time cause the generated Makefile.in to use the programs specified by `configure`. This is done by having `configure` substitute values into each `_PROGRAMS` definition, while listing all optionally built programs in `EXTRA_PROGRAMS`.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = cpio pax $(MT)
libexec_PROGRAMS = $(RMT)
EXTRA_PROGRAMS = mt rmt
```

As explained in Support for executable extensions, Automake will rewrite `bin_PROGRAMS`, `libexec_PROGRAMS`, and `EXTRA_PROGRAMS`, appending ‘$(EXEEXT)’ to each binary. Obviously it cannot rewrite values obtained at run-time through `configure` substitutions, therefore you should take care of appending ‘$(EXEEXT)’ yourself, as in ‘AC_SUBST([MT], ['mt${EXEEXT}'])’.

#### Conditional Programs using Automake Conditionals

You can also use Automake conditionals (see Conditionals) to select programs to be built. In this case you don’t have to worry about ‘$(EXEEXT)’ or `EXTRA_PROGRAMS`.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = cpio pax
if WANT_MT
  bin_PROGRAMS += mt
endif
if WANT_RMT
  libexec_PROGRAMS = rmt
endif
```

### 8.2 Building a library

Building a library is much like building a program. In this case, the name of the primary is `LIBRARIES`. Libraries can be installed in `libdir` or `pkglibdir`.

See Building a Shared Library, for information on how to build shared libraries using Libtool and the `LTLIBRARIES` primary.

Each `_LIBRARIES` variable is a list of the libraries to be built. For instance, to create a library named libcpio.a, but not install it, you would write:

```
noinst_LIBRARIES = libcpio.a
libcpio_a_SOURCES = ...
```

The sources that go into a library are determined exactly as they are for programs, via the `_SOURCES` variables. Note that the library name is canonicalized (see How derived variables are named), so the `_SOURCES` variable corresponding to libcpio.a is ‘libcpio_a_SOURCES’, not ‘libcpio.a_SOURCES’.

Extra objects can be added to a library using the `*library*_LIBADD` variable. This should be used for objects determined by `configure`. Again from `cpio`:

```
libcpio_a_LIBADD = $(LIBOBJS) $(ALLOCA)
```

In addition, sources for extra objects that will not exist until configure-time must be added to the `BUILT_SOURCES` variable (see Built Sources).

Building a static library is done by compiling all object files, then by invoking ‘$(AR) $(ARFLAGS)’ followed by the name of the library and the list of objects, and finally by calling ‘$(RANLIB)’ on that library. You should call `AC_PROG_RANLIB` from your configure.ac to define `RANLIB` (Automake will complain otherwise). You should also call `AM_PROG_AR` to define `AR`, in order to support unusual archivers such as Microsoft lib. `ARFLAGS` will default to `cr`; you can override this variable by setting it in your Makefile.am or by `AC_SUBST`ing it from your configure.ac. You can override the `AR` variable by defining a per-library `maude_AR` variable (see Program and Library Variables).

Be careful when selecting library components conditionally. Because building an empty library is not portable, you should ensure that any library always contains at least one object.

To use a static library when building a program, add it to `LDADD` for this program. In the following example, the program cpio is statically linked with the library libcpio.a.

```
noinst_LIBRARIES = libcpio.a
libcpio_a_SOURCES = ...

bin_PROGRAMS = cpio
cpio_SOURCES = cpio.c ...
cpio_LDADD = libcpio.a
```

### 8.3 Building a Shared Library

Building shared libraries portably is a relatively complex matter. For this reason, GNU Libtool (see Introduction in *The Libtool Manual*) was created to help build shared libraries in a platform-independent way.

#### 8.3.1 The Libtool Concept

Libtool abstracts shared and static libraries into a unified concept henceforth called *libtool libraries*. Libtool libraries are files using the .la suffix, and can designate a static library, a shared library, or maybe both. Their exact nature cannot be determined until ./configure is run: not all platforms support all kinds of libraries, and users can explicitly select which libraries should be built. (However the package’s maintainers can tune the default; see The `LT_INIT` macro in *The Libtool Manual*.)

Because object files for shared and static libraries must be compiled differently, Libtool is also used during compilation. Object files built by Libtool are called *libtool objects*: these are files using the .lo suffix. Libtool libraries are built from these libtool objects.

You should not assume anything about the structure of .la or .lo files and how Libtool constructs them; this is Libtool’s concern. However, the existence of these files matters, because they are used as targets and dependencies in Makefile rules when building Libtool libraries. There are situations where you may have to refer to these, for instance when expressing dependencies for building source files conditionally (see Libtool Libraries with Conditional Sources).

People considering writing a plug-in system, with dynamically loaded modules, should look into libltdl: Libtool’s dlopening library (see Using libltdl in *The Libtool Manual*). This offers a portable dlopening facility to load Libtool libraries dynamically, and can also achieve static linking where unavoidable.

Before we discuss how to use Libtool with Automake in detail, it should be noted that the Libtool manual also has a section about how to use Automake with Libtool (see Using Automake with Libtool in *The Libtool Manual*).

#### 8.3.2 Building Libtool Libraries

Automake uses Libtool to build libraries declared with the `LTLIBRARIES` primary. Each `_LTLIBRARIES` variable is a list of Libtool libraries to build. For instance, to create a libtool library named libgettext.la, and install it in `libdir`, write:

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libgettext.la
libgettext_la_SOURCES = gettext.c gettext.h ...
```

Automake predefines the variable `pkglibdir`, so you can use `pkglib_LTLIBRARIES` to install libraries in ‘$(libdir)/@PACKAGE@/’.

If gettext.h is a public header file that needs to be installed in order for people to use the library, it should be declared using a `_HEADERS` variable, not in `libgettext_la_SOURCES`. Headers listed in the latter should be internal headers that are not part of the public interface.

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libgettext.la
libgettext_la_SOURCES = gettext.c ...
include_HEADERS = gettext.h ...
```

A package can build and install such a library along with other programs that use it. This dependency should be specified using `LDADD`. The following example builds a program named hello that is linked with libgettext.la.

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libgettext.la
libgettext_la_SOURCES = gettext.c ...

bin_PROGRAMS = hello
hello_SOURCES = hello.c ...
hello_LDADD = libgettext.la
```

Whether hello is statically or dynamically linked with libgettext.la is not yet known: this will depend on the configuration of Libtool and the capabilities of the host.

#### 8.3.3 Building Libtool Libraries Conditionally

Like conditional programs (see Conditional compilation of programs), there are two main ways to build conditional libraries: using Automake conditionals or using Autoconf `AC_SUBST`itutions.

The important implementation detail you have to be aware of is that the place where a library will be installed matters to Libtool: it needs to be indicated *at link-time* using the -rpath option.

For libraries whose destination directory is known when Automake runs, Automake will automatically supply the appropriate -rpath option to `libtool`. This is the case for libraries listed explicitly in some installable `_LTLIBRARIES` variables such as `lib_LTLIBRARIES`.

However, for libraries determined at configure time (and thus mentioned in `EXTRA_LTLIBRARIES`), Automake does not know the final installation directory. For such libraries you must add the -rpath option to the appropriate `_LDFLAGS` variable by hand.

The examples below illustrate the differences between these two methods.

Here is an example where `WANTEDLIBS` is an `AC_SUBST`ed variable set at ./configure-time to either libfoo.la, libbar.la, both, or none. Although ‘$(WANTEDLIBS)’ appears in the `lib_LTLIBRARIES`, Automake cannot guess it relates to libfoo.la or libbar.la at the time it creates the link rule for these two libraries. Therefore the -rpath argument must be explicitly supplied.

```
EXTRA_LTLIBRARIES = libfoo.la libbar.la
lib_LTLIBRARIES = $(WANTEDLIBS)
libfoo_la_SOURCES = foo.c ...
libfoo_la_LDFLAGS = -rpath '$(libdir)'
libbar_la_SOURCES = bar.c ...
libbar_la_LDFLAGS = -rpath '$(libdir)'
```

Here is how the same Makefile.am would look using Automake conditionals named `WANT_LIBFOO` and `WANT_LIBBAR`. Now Automake is able to compute the -rpath setting itself, because it’s clear that both libraries will end up in ‘$(libdir)’ if they are installed.

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES =
if WANT_LIBFOO
lib_LTLIBRARIES += libfoo.la
endif
if WANT_LIBBAR
lib_LTLIBRARIES += libbar.la
endif
libfoo_la_SOURCES = foo.c ...
libbar_la_SOURCES = bar.c ...
```

#### 8.3.4 Libtool Libraries with Conditional Sources

Conditional compilation of sources in a library can be achieved in the same way as conditional compilation of sources in a program (see Conditional compilation of sources). The only difference is that `_LIBADD` should be used instead of `_LDADD` and that it should mention libtool objects (.lo files).

So, to mimic the hello example from Conditional compilation of sources, we could build a libhello.la library using either hello-linux.c or hello-generic.c with the following Makefile.am.

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libhello.la
libhello_la_SOURCES = hello-common.c
EXTRA_libhello_la_SOURCES = hello-linux.c hello-generic.c
libhello_la_LIBADD = $(HELLO_SYSTEM)
libhello_la_DEPENDENCIES = $(HELLO_SYSTEM)
```

And make sure `configure` defines `HELLO_SYSTEM` as either hello-linux.lo or hello-generic.lo.

Or we could simply use an Automake conditional as follows.

```
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libhello.la
libhello_la_SOURCES = hello-common.c
if LINUX
libhello_la_SOURCES += hello-linux.c
else
libhello_la_SOURCES += hello-generic.c
endif
```

#### 8.3.5 Libtool Convenience Libraries

Sometimes you want to build Libtool libraries that should not be installed. These are called *libtool convenience libraries* and are typically used to encapsulate many sublibraries, later gathered into one big installed library.

Libtool convenience libraries are declared by directory-less variables such as `noinst_LTLIBRARIES`, `check_LTLIBRARIES`, or even `EXTRA_LTLIBRARIES`. Unlike installed Libtool libraries they do not need an -rpath flag at link time (this is in fact the only difference).

Convenience libraries listed in `noinst_LTLIBRARIES` are always built. Those listed in `check_LTLIBRARIES` are built only upon ‘make check’. Finally, libraries listed in `EXTRA_LTLIBRARIES` are never built explicitly: Automake outputs rules to build them, but if the library does not appear as a Makefile dependency anywhere it won’t be built (this is why `EXTRA_LTLIBRARIES` is used for conditional compilation).

Here is a sample setup merging Libtool convenience libraries from subdirectories into one main libtop.la library.

```
# -- Top-level Makefile.am --
SUBDIRS = sub1 sub2 ...
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libtop.la
libtop_la_SOURCES =
libtop_la_LIBADD = \
  sub1/libsub1.la \
  sub2/libsub2.la \
  ...

# -- sub1/Makefile.am --
noinst_LTLIBRARIES = libsub1.la
libsub1_la_SOURCES = ...

# -- sub2/Makefile.am --
# showing nested convenience libraries
SUBDIRS = sub2.1 sub2.2 ...
noinst_LTLIBRARIES = libsub2.la
libsub2_la_SOURCES =
libsub2_la_LIBADD = \
  sub21/libsub21.la \
  sub22/libsub22.la \
  ...
```

When using such a setup, beware that `automake` will assume libtop.la is to be linked with the C linker. This is because `libtop_la_SOURCES` is empty, so `automake` picks C as default language. If `libtop_la_SOURCES` was not empty, `automake` would select the linker as explained in How the Linker is Chosen.

If one of the sublibraries contains non-C source, it is important that the appropriate linker be chosen. One way to achieve this is to pretend that there is such a non-C file among the sources of the library, thus forcing `automake` to select the appropriate linker. Here is the top-level Makefile of our example updated to force C++ linking.

```
SUBDIRS = sub1 sub2 ...
lib_LTLIBRARIES = libtop.la
libtop_la_SOURCES =
# Dummy C++ source to cause C++ linking.
nodist_EXTRA_libtop_la_SOURCES = dummy.cxx
libtop_la_LIBADD = \
  sub1/libsub1.la \
  sub2/libsub2.la \
  ...
```

‘EXTRA_*_SOURCES’ variables are used to keep track of source files that might be compiled (this is mostly useful when doing conditional compilation using `AC_SUBST`; see Libtool Libraries with Conditional Sources), and the `nodist_` prefix means the listed sources are not to be distributed (see Program and Library Variables). In effect the file dummy.cxx does not need to exist in the source tree. Of course if you have some real source file to list in `libtop_la_SOURCES` there is no point in cheating with `nodist_EXTRA_libtop_la_SOURCES`.

#### 8.3.6 Libtool Modules

These are Libtool libraries meant to be dlopened. They are indicated to `libtool` by passing -module at link-time.

```
pkglib_LTLIBRARIES = mymodule.la
mymodule_la_SOURCES = doit.c
mymodule_la_LDFLAGS = -module
```

Ordinarily, Automake requires that a library’s name start with `lib`. However, when building a dynamically loadable module you might wish to use a "nonstandard" name. Automake will not complain about such nonstandard names if it knows the library being built is a libtool module, i.e., if -module explicitly appears in the library’s `_LDFLAGS` variable (or in the common `AM_LDFLAGS` variable when no per-library `_LDFLAGS` variable is defined).

As always, `AC_SUBST` variables are black boxes to Automake since their values are not yet known when `automake` is run. Therefore if -module is set via such a variable, Automake cannot notice it and will proceed as if the library was an ordinary libtool library, with strict naming.

If `mymodule_la_SOURCES` is not specified, then it defaults to the single file mymodule.c (see Default `_SOURCES`).

#### 8.3.7 `_LIBADD`, `_LDFLAGS`, and `_LIBTOOLFLAGS`

As shown in previous sections, the ‘*library*_LIBADD’ variable should be used to list extra libtool objects (.lo files) or libtool libraries (.la) to add to *library*.

The ‘*library*_LDFLAGS’ variable is the place to list additional `libtool` linking flags, such as -version-info, -static, and a lot more. See Link mode in *The Libtool Manual*.

The `libtool` command has two kinds of options: mode-specific options and generic options. Mode-specific options such as the aforementioned linking flags should be lumped with the other flags passed to the tool invoked by `libtool` (hence the use of ‘*library*_LDFLAGS’ for libtool linking flags). Generic options include --tag=*tag* and --silent (see Invoking `libtool` in *The Libtool Manual* for more options). They should appear before the mode selection on the command line; in Makefile.ams they should be listed in the ‘*library*_LIBTOOLFLAGS’ variable.

If ‘*library*_LIBTOOLFLAGS’ is not defined, then the variable `AM_LIBTOOLFLAGS` is used instead.

These flags are passed to `libtool` after the --tag=*tag* option computed by Automake (if any), so ‘*library*_LIBTOOLFLAGS’ (or `AM_LIBTOOLFLAGS`) is a good place to override or supplement the --tag=*tag* setting.

The libtool rules also use a `LIBTOOLFLAGS` variable that should not be set in Makefile.am: this is a user variable (see Flag Variables Ordering). It allows users to run ‘make LIBTOOLFLAGS=--silent’, for instance. Note that the verbosity of `libtool` can also be influenced by the Automake support for silent rules (see How Automake can help in silencing Make).

#### 8.3.8 `LTLIBOBJS` and `LTALLOCA`

Where an ordinary library might include ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ or ‘$(ALLOCA)’ (see Special handling for `LIBOBJS` and `ALLOCA`), a libtool library must use ‘$(LTLIBOBJS)’ or ‘$(LTALLOCA)’. This is required because the object files that libtool operates on do not necessarily end in .o.

Nowadays, the computation of `LTLIBOBJS` from `LIBOBJS` is performed automatically by Autoconf (see `AC_LIBOBJ` vs. `LIBOBJS` in *The Autoconf Manual*).

#### 8.3.9.1 Error: ‘required file './ltmain.sh' not found’—`libtoolize` needed

Libtool comes with a tool called `libtoolize` that will install Libtool’s supporting files into a package. Running this command will install ltmain.sh. You should execute it before `aclocal` and `automake`.

People upgrading old packages to newer autotools are likely to face this issue because older Automake versions used to call `libtoolize`. Therefore old build scripts do not call `libtoolize`.

Since Automake 1.6, it has been decided that running `libtoolize` was not Automake’s business. Instead, that functionality has been moved into the `autoreconf` command (see Using `autoreconf` in *The Autoconf Manual*). The `autoreconf` command saves you from having to figure out which infrastructure scripts to run in what order. Augmenting existing bootstrap or autogen.sh scripts with a call to `autoreconf` should also free you from any similar incompatible change in the future.

#### 8.3.9.2 Error: ‘Libtool library used but 'LIBTOOL' is undefined’—`libtoolize` redux

This error message results from Automake seeing Libtool being used in Makefile.am, but the `LIBTOOL` variable is not defined. There are two common reasons for this. First, `LT_INIT` is missing from configure.ac; it can simply be added.

The second reason is more complicated: if you’ve installed Automake under a separate prefix, Automake cannot know where to find the `LT_INIT` macro. Automake looks in the aclocal.m4 file, which is generated by the `aclocal` command (see Auto-generating aclocal.m4: Invoking `aclocal`). But since the default search paths for `aclocal` are based on where it is installed (see Macro Search Path), if Automake is installed in one place (e.g., because it’s for a test release), and Libtool in another (e.g., for general system use), libtool.m4 won’t be found by `aclocal` and thus `LT_INIT` won’t be defined.

The best solution is to run `libtoolize` in the tree that is using the separately-installed Automake. That will copy libtool.m4 and the other Libtool M4 files and scripts into your package, including ltmain.sh (see previous section). If you have subpackages that use Libtool independently, you’ll need to run `libtoolize` in each of them. See Invoking libtoolize in *The Libtool Manual*.

The `libtoolize` output suggests using an m4 subdirectory:

```
libtoolize: Consider adding 'AC_CONFIG_MACRO_DIRS([m4])' to configure.ac,
libtoolize: and rerunning libtoolize and aclocal.
libtoolize: Consider adding '-I m4' to ACLOCAL_AMFLAGS in Makefile.am.
```

For purposes of Libtool and Automake, however, an m4 subdirectory is required, not just something to consider. Without having the Libtool M4 files in the local package, `aclocal` will (frustratingly) report the same ‘Libtool library used but ...’ error. (The name of the subdirectory for the M4 files can be anything, but ‘m4’ is by far the most common convention.)

Here is a concrete example. Suppose you’ve installed a test release of Automake (thank you) with `--prefix=/tmp/amtest`, and thus put `/tmp/amtest/bin` first in your `PATH`. You already have Libtool installed under `/usr/local/gnu`. Then, your Libtool-using package will fail to bootstrap, with the error:

```
Makefile.am:161: error: Libtool library used but 'LIBTOOL' is undefined
...
```

You can resolve this by ensuring your configure.ac includes these lines (after the `AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE`):

```
AC_CONFIG_MACRO_DIRS([m4])
AM_PROG_AR
LT_INIT
```

and then running:

```
libtoolize
autoreconf
```

To summarize, the `libtoolize` (from the system directory) copies libtool.m4 and the other Libtool support files into your package. The subsequent `autoreconf` then runs `aclocal` (under the test prefix) which can now find `LT_INIT`.

(For more discussion of this, see https://bugs.gnu.org/71847.

#### 8.3.9.3 Objects ‘created with both libtool and without’

Sometimes, the same source file is used both to build a Libtool library and to build another non-libtool target (be it a program or another library).

Let’s consider the following Makefile.am.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = prog
prog_SOURCES = prog.c foo.c ...

lib_LTLIBRARIES = libfoo.la
libfoo_la_SOURCES = foo.c ...
```

(In this trivial case the issue could be avoided by linking libfoo.la with prog instead of listing foo.c in `prog_SOURCES`. But let’s assume we want to keep prog and libfoo.la separate.)

Technically, it means that we should build foo.$(OBJEXT) for prog, and foo.lo for libfoo.la. The problem is that in the course of creating foo.lo, Libtool may erase (or replace) foo.$(OBJEXT), and this cannot be avoided.

Therefore, when Automake detects this situation it will complain with a message such as

```
object 'foo.$(OBJEXT)' created both with libtool and without
```

A workaround for this issue is to ensure that these two objects get different basenames. As explained in Why are object files sometimes renamed?, this happens automatically when per-target flags are used.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = prog
prog_SOURCES = prog.c foo.c ...
prog_CFLAGS = $(AM_CFLAGS)

lib_LTLIBRARIES = libfoo.la
libfoo_la_SOURCES = foo.c ...
```

Adding ‘prog_CFLAGS = $(AM_CFLAGS)’ is almost a no-op, because when the `prog_CFLAGS` is defined, it is used instead of `AM_CFLAGS`. However as a side effect it will cause prog.c and foo.c to be compiled as prog-prog.$(OBJEXT) and prog-foo.$(OBJEXT), which solves the issue.

### 8.4 Program and Library Variables

Associated with each program is a collection of variables that can be used to modify how that program is built. There is a similar list of such variables for each library. The canonical name of the program (or library) is used as a base for naming these variables.

In the list below, we use the name “maude” to refer to the program or library. In your Makefile.am you would replace this with the canonical name of your program. This list also refers to “maude” as a program, but in general the same rules apply for both static and dynamic libraries; the documentation below notes situations where programs and libraries differ.

**`maude_SOURCES` ¶**

This variable, if it exists, lists all the source files that are compiled to build the program. These files are added to the distribution by default. When building the program, Automake will cause each source file to be compiled to a single .o file (or .lo when using Libtool). Normally these object files are named after the source file, but other factors can change this. If a file in the `_SOURCES` variable has an unrecognized extension, Automake will do one of two things with it. If a suffix rule exists for turning files with the unrecognized extension into .o files, then `automake` will treat this file as it will any other source file (see Support for Other Languages). Otherwise, the file will be ignored as though it were a header file.

The prefixes `dist_` and `nodist_` can be used to control whether files listed in a `_SOURCES` variable are distributed. `dist_` is redundant, as sources are distributed by default, but it can be specified for clarity if desired.

It is possible to have both `dist_` and `nodist_` variants of a given `_SOURCES` variable at once; this lets you easily distribute some files and not others, for instance:

```
nodist_maude_SOURCES = nodist.c
dist_maude_SOURCES = dist-me.c
```

By default the output file (on Unix systems, the .o file) will be put into the current build directory. However, if the option subdir-objects is in effect in the current directory then the .o file will be put into the subdirectory named after the source file. For instance, with subdir-objects enabled, sub/dir/file.c will be compiled to sub/dir/file.o. Some projects prefer or require this mode of operation. You can specify subdir-objects in `AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS` (see Changing Automake’s Behavior).

When subdir-objects is specified, and source files which lie outside the current directory tree are nevertheless specified, as in `foo_SOURCES = ../lib/other.c`, Automake will still remove ../lib/other.o, in fact, ../lib/*.o (e.g., at `make clean`, even though it is arguably wrong for one subdirectory to clean in a sibling. This may or may not be changed in the future.

**`EXTRA_maude_SOURCES` ¶**

Automake needs to know the list of files you intend to compile *statically*. For one thing, this is the only way Automake has of knowing what sort of language support a given Makefile.in requires. (There are other, more obscure reasons for this limitation as well.) This means that, for example, you can’t put a configure substitution like ‘@my_sources@’ into a ‘_SOURCES’ variable. If you intend to conditionally compile source files and use configure to substitute the appropriate object names into, e.g., `_LDADD` (see below), then you should list the corresponding source files in the `EXTRA_` variable.

This variable also supports `dist_` and `nodist_` prefixes. For instance, `nodist_EXTRA_maude_SOURCES` would list extra sources that may need to be built, but should not be distributed.

**`maude_AR` ¶**

A static library is created by default by invoking ‘$(AR) $(ARFLAGS)’ followed by the name of the library and then the objects being put into the library. You can override this by setting the `_AR` variable. This is usually used with C++; some C++ compilers require a special invocation in order to instantiate all the templates that should go into a library. For instance, the SGI C++ compiler likes this variable set like so:

```
libmaude_a_AR = $(CXX) -ar -o
```

**`maude_RANLIB` ¶**

A static library’s index is updated by default by invoking ‘$(RANLIB)’ followed by the name of the library. You can override this by setting the `_RANLIB` variable.

**`maude_LIBADD` ¶**

Extra objects can be added to a *library* using the `_LIBADD` variable. For instance, this should be used for objects determined by `configure` (see Building a library).

In the case of Libtool libraries, `maude_LIBADD` can also refer to other Libtool libraries.

**`maude_LDADD` ¶**

Extra objects (*.$(OBJEXT)) and libraries (*.a, *.la) can be added to a *program* by listing them in the `_LDADD` variable. For instance, this should be used for objects determined by `configure` (see Linking the program).

`_LDADD` and `_LIBADD` are inappropriate for passing program-specific linker flags (except for -l, -L, -dlopen and -dlpreopen). Use the `_LDFLAGS` variable for this purpose.

For instance, if your configure.ac uses `AC_PATH_XTRA`, you could link your program against the X libraries like so:

```
maude_LDADD = $(X_PRE_LIBS) $(X_LIBS) $(X_EXTRA_LIBS)
```

We recommend that you use -l and -L only when referring to third-party libraries, and give the explicit file names of any library built by your package. Doing so will ensure that `maude_DEPENDENCIES` (see below) is correctly defined by default.

**`maude_LDFLAGS` ¶**

This variable is used to pass extra flags to the link step of a program or a shared library. It overrides the `AM_LDFLAGS` variable, even if it is defined only in a false branch of a conditional; in other words, if `*prog*_LDFLAGS` is defined at all, `AM_LDFLAGS` will not be used.

**`maude_LIBTOOLFLAGS` ¶**

This variable is used to pass extra options to `libtool`. It overrides the `AM_LIBTOOLFLAGS` variable. These options are output before `libtool`’s --mode=*mode* option, so they should not be mode-specific options (those belong to the compiler or linker flags). See `_LIBADD`, `_LDFLAGS`, and `_LIBTOOLFLAGS`.

**`maude_DEPENDENCIES` ¶**

**`EXTRA_maude_DEPENDENCIES` ¶**

It is also occasionally useful to have a target (program or library) depend on some other file that is not in fact part of that target. This can be done using the `_DEPENDENCIES` variable. Each target depends on the contents of such a variable, but no further interpretation is done.

Since these dependencies are associated with the link rule used to create the programs they should normally list files used by the link command. That is *.$(OBJEXT), *.a, or *.la files for programs; *.lo and *.la files for Libtool libraries; and *.$(OBJEXT) files for static libraries. In rare cases you may need to add other kinds of files such as linker scripts, but *listing a source file in `_DEPENDENCIES` is wrong*. If some source file needs to be built before all the components of a program are built, consider using the `BUILT_SOURCES` variable (see Built Sources).

If `_DEPENDENCIES` is not supplied, it is computed by Automake. The automatically-assigned value is the contents of `_LDADD` or `_LIBADD`, with most configure substitutions, -l, -L, -dlopen and -dlpreopen options removed. The configure substitutions that are left in are only ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’; these are left because it is known that they will not cause an invalid value for `_DEPENDENCIES` to be generated.

`_DEPENDENCIES` is more likely used to perform conditional compilation using an `AC_SUBST` variable that contains a list of objects. See Conditional compilation of sources, and Libtool Libraries with Conditional Sources.

The `EXTRA_*_DEPENDENCIES` variable may be useful for cases where you merely want to augment the `automake`-generated `_DEPENDENCIES` variable rather than replacing it.

**`maude_LINK` ¶**

You can override the linker on a per-program basis. By default the linker is chosen according to the languages used by the program. For instance, a program that includes C++ source code would use the C++ compiler to link. The `_LINK` variable must hold the name of a command that can be passed all the .o file names and libraries to link against as arguments. Note that the name of the underlying program is *not* passed to `_LINK`; typically one uses ‘$@’:

```
maude_LINK = $(CCLD) -magic -o $@
```

If a `_LINK` variable is not supplied, it may still be generated and used by Automake due to the use of per-target link flags such as `_CFLAGS`, `_LDFLAGS` or `_LIBTOOLFLAGS`, in cases where they apply.

If the variable `AM_V_*_LINK` exists, it is used to output a status line in silent mode; otherwise, `AM_V_GEN` is used.

**`maude_CCASFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_CFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_CPPFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_CXXFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_FFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_GCJFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_LFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_OBJCFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_OBJCXXFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_RFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_UPCFLAGS` ¶**

**`maude_YFLAGS` ¶**

Automake allows you to set compilation flags on a per-program (or per-library) basis. A single source file can be included in several programs, and it will potentially be compiled with different flags for each program. This works for any language directly supported by Automake. These *per-target compilation flags* are ‘_CCASFLAGS’, ‘_CFLAGS’, ‘_CPPFLAGS’, ‘_CXXFLAGS’, ‘_FFLAGS’, ‘_GCJFLAGS’, ‘_LFLAGS’, ‘_OBJCFLAGS’, ‘_OBJCXXFLAGS’, ‘_RFLAGS’, ‘_UPCFLAGS’, and ‘_YFLAGS’.

When using a per-target compilation flag, Automake will choose a different name for the intermediate object files. Ordinarily a file like sample.c will be compiled to produce sample.o. However, if the program’s `_CFLAGS` variable is set, then the object file will be named, for instance, maude-sample.o. (See also Why are object files sometimes renamed?.)

In compilations with per-target flags, the ordinary ‘AM_’ form of the flags variable is *not* automatically included in the compilation (however, the user form of the variable *is* included). So for instance, if you want the hypothetical maude compilations to also use the value of `AM_CFLAGS`, you would need to write:

```
maude_CFLAGS = ... your flags ... $(AM_CFLAGS)
```

See Flag Variables Ordering, for more discussion about the interaction between user variables, ‘AM_’ shadow variables, and per-target variables.

**`maude_SHORTNAME` ¶**

On some platforms the allowable file names are very short. In order to support these systems and per-target compilation flags at the same time, Automake allows you to set a “short name” that will influence how intermediate object files are named. For instance, in the following example,

```
bin_PROGRAMS = maude
maude_CPPFLAGS = -DSOMEFLAG
maude_SHORTNAME = m
maude_SOURCES = sample.c ...
```

the object file would be named m-sample.o rather than maude-sample.o.

This facility is rarely needed in practice, and we recommend avoiding it until you find it is required.

### 8.5 Default `_SOURCES`

`_SOURCES` variables are used to specify source files of programs (see Building a program), libraries (see Building a library), and Libtool libraries (see Building a Shared Library).

When no such variable is specified for a target, Automake will define one itself. The default is to compile a single C file whose base name is the name of the target itself, with any extension replaced by `AM_DEFAULT_SOURCE_EXT`, which defaults to .c.

For example if you have the following somewhere in your Makefile.am with no corresponding `libfoo_a_SOURCES`:

```
lib_LIBRARIES = libfoo.a sub/libc++.a
```

libfoo.a will be built using a default source file named libfoo.c, and sub/libc++.a will be built from sub/libc++.c. (In older versions sub/libc++.a would be built from sub_libc___a.c, i.e., the default source was the canonicalized name of the target, with .c appended. We believe the new behavior is more sensible, but for backward compatibility `automake` will use the old name if a file or a rule with that name exists and `AM_DEFAULT_SOURCE_EXT` is not used.)

Default sources are mainly useful in test suites, when building many test programs each from a single source. For instance, in

```
check_PROGRAMS = test1 test2 test3
AM_DEFAULT_SOURCE_EXT = .cpp
```

test1, test2, and test3 will be built from test1.cpp, test2.cpp, and test3.cpp. Without the last line, they will be built from test1.c, test2.c, and test3.c.

Another case where this is convenient is building many Libtool modules (module*n*.la), each defined in its own file (module*n*.c).

```
AM_LDFLAGS = -module
lib_LTLIBRARIES = module1.la module2.la module3.la
```

Finally, there is one situation where this default source computation needs to be avoided: when a target should not be built from sources. We already saw such an example in Building true and false; this happens when all the constituents of a target have already been compiled and just need to be combined using a `_LDADD` variable. Then it is necessary to define an empty `_SOURCES` variable, so that `automake` does not compute a default.

```
bin_PROGRAMS = target
target_SOURCES =
target_LDADD = libmain.a libmisc.a
```

### 8.6 Special handling for `LIBOBJS` and `ALLOCA`

The ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’ variables list object files that should be compiled into the project to provide an implementation for functions that are missing or broken on the host system. They are substituted by configure.

These variables are defined by Autoconf macros such as `AC_LIBOBJ`, `AC_REPLACE_FUNCS` (see Generic Function Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*), or `AC_FUNC_ALLOCA` (see Particular Function Checks in *The Autoconf Manual*). Many other Autoconf macros call `AC_LIBOBJ` or `AC_REPLACE_FUNCS` to populate ‘$(LIBOBJS)’.

Using these variables is very similar to doing conditional compilation using `AC_SUBST` variables, as described in Conditional compilation of sources. That is, when building a program, ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’ should be added to the associated ‘*_LDADD’ variable, or to the ‘*_LIBADD’ variable when building a library. However there is no need to list the corresponding sources in ‘EXTRA_*_SOURCES’ nor to define ‘*_DEPENDENCIES’. Automake automatically adds ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’ to the dependencies, and it will discover the list of corresponding source files automatically (by tracing the invocations of the `AC_LIBSOURCE` Autoconf macros). If you have already defined ‘*_DEPENDENCIES’ explicitly for an unrelated reason, then you either need to add these variables manually, or use ‘EXTRA_*_DEPENDENCIES’ instead of ‘*_DEPENDENCIES’.

These variables are usually used to build a portability library that is linked with all the programs of the project. We now review a sample setup. First, configure.ac contains some checks that affect either `LIBOBJS` or `ALLOCA`.

```
# configure.ac
...
AC_CONFIG_LIBOBJ_DIR([lib])
...
AC_FUNC_MALLOC             dnl May add malloc.$(OBJEXT) to LIBOBJS
AC_FUNC_MEMCMP             dnl May add memcmp.$(OBJEXT) to LIBOBJS
AC_REPLACE_FUNCS([strdup]) dnl May add strdup.$(OBJEXT) to LIBOBJS
AC_FUNC_ALLOCA             dnl May add alloca.$(OBJEXT) to ALLOCA
...
AC_CONFIG_FILES([
  lib/Makefile
  src/Makefile
])
AC_OUTPUT
```

The `AC_CONFIG_LIBOBJ_DIR` tells Autoconf that the source files of these object files are to be found in the lib/ directory. Automake can also use this information, otherwise it expects the source files are to be in the directory where the ‘$(LIBOBJS)’ and ‘$(ALLOCA)’ variables are used.
