---
title: "List of Jurassic Park (franchise) characters (part 5/5)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexis_'Lex'_Murphy
domain: jurassic-park-novel
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: jurassic park novel
fetched: 2026-07-09
part: 5/5
---

## Appearing in *Dominion*

These characters are introduced in the sixth film, *Jurassic World Dominion* (2022), which revolves around the genetics corporation Biosyn and a dinosaur black market in Malta.

### Kayla Watts

- Portrayed by: DeWanda Wise

Kayla Watts is a U.S. Air Force veteran and cargo pilot who transports dinosaurs to Biosyn. Having witnessed Owen Grady and Claire Dearing's adoptive daughter Maisie Lockwood being trafficked to the Biosyn sanctuary, she helps them rescue her from the company's CEO Dr. Lewis Dodgson. Kayla is upset when her plane, a Fairchild C-119, is attacked by a *Quetzalcoatlus* and crashes in the Biosyn sanctuary. Later, she flies the survivors out in a Biosyn helicopter. She is subsequently shown happily purchasing a new plane.

Wise did not see the original *Jurassic Park* film until 2019, the year she was cast in *Dominion*. Trevorrow was impressed by Wise's lead role in the television series *She's Gotta Have It*. He offered her the role of Kayla during their first meeting, without having her audition. Wise is of African American descent, although the character was not originally written as such. Wise worked with the film's co-writer, Emily Carmichael, to refine the character. Wise came up with Kayla's traits and backstory, stating that she is bisexual and "fresh out of the Air Force". Kayla was inspired by Indiana Jones and Han Solo, two characters portrayed by Harrison Ford. Wise said the character was also inspired by Sarah Harding's "get-it-done" personality in the novel *The Lost World*.

Wise noted that much of the film takes place in Kayla's "world", specifically places that she is familiar with, such as Biosyn's headquarters, the black market, and her airplane. She described Kayla as being disillusioned early on in the film, in the same way that "many of us human beings on planet Earth today feel, which is just like, 'Well, I mean, if people in power, if they don't care, what can I do?'" According to Wise, her character is "in this place when we first meet her that's just like, 'If you can't beat them, join them'". Wise prepared for the role by working out, and she performed her own stunts. Much of the cockpit scene – in which Kayla is flying Owen and Claire to Biosyn – was improvised.

Before the character's name was revealed, some fans speculated that Wise would be playing Kelly Curtis, taking over the role from Vanessa Lee Chester. Trevorrow said such an idea was not considered: "This is a global franchise for people all around the world. Inventing new Black heroes is important". Wise also said she would have turned down a role as Kelly, not wanting to replace Chester.

### Ramsay Cole

- Portrayed by: Mamoudou Athie

Ramsay Cole is the head of communications for Biosyn, and is also being groomed by CEO Lewis Dodgson as his second-in-command. Dodgson describes Ramsay as a younger version of himself to Alan Grant and Ellie Sattler when introducing them. Unlike Dodgson, Ramsey is kind-hearted, moral and even cares for the dinosaurs, mourning how they were being treated and wanting more humane ways of handling them. In an extended scene, shows that Ramsay sees potentials in Dodgson to be a good man, and urges him to atone his crimes by sharing the company's research worldwide and repurposing his hybrid locusts to improve the world's agricultures. Although Ramsay is assigned to be their tour guide at Biosyn, the two eventually go off to collect a DNA sample from the company's giant locusts, after Malcolm informed them of a scheme to use the insects for domination over the food industry. Upon finding Grant and Sattler in a restricted area, Ramsay reveals himself to not only be on their side, but to have been the one who had revealed the truth to Malcolm in the first place. Later, as Dodgson prepares to flee, he tries to enlist Ramsay's help in rebuilding elsewhere and is shocked to realize that Ramsay had betrayed him. Ramsay walks away after simply telling Dodgson that he is nothing like him, given up on changing Dodgson. Ramsay's knowledge of the facility proves to be crucial in the group's escape. After the giant locusts are stopped and Dodgson is killed by three *Dilophosaurus*, Ramsay joins Alan, Ellie, and Ian in testifying against Biosyn as a whistleblower.

Trevorrow had seen Athie in the 2018 film *The Front Runner* and was impressed with his performance, casting him in *Dominion* without going through an audition or screen test. Athie said that Ramsay Cole, as originally written, was "a lot less sure and confident of himself" and "a little silly". He and Trevorrow worked together to reshape the character. Athie described the final character as "a very ambitious and forward-thinking young man". Of all the characters in *Dominion*, Ramsay's story arc is Trevorrow's favorite: "It's a great character for young people to look to as we realize that our mentors and our bosses aren't necessarily the ones who are going to create change. It's gonna take us doing it".

### Soyona Santos

- Portrayed by: Dichen Lachman

Soyona Santos is a dinosaur smuggler connected with the black market and serves as Lewis Dodgson's criminal liaison. She raises a pack of *Atrociraptors* originally from Biosyn which are trained to kill any target, as designated by a laser pointer, for Rainn Delacourt to deliver to Riyadh.

During a raid at the black market, Santos warns Dodgson that Owen and Claire are present and looking for their daughter Maisie, who has been kidnapped by her under Dodgson's orders. Santos releases her raptors to attack Barry. Claire catches up with Santos and incapacitates her after a brief fight. Claire interrogates her with a taser into revealing Maisie's whereabouts. Santos revealed the location much to her dismay to Claire, she also warns Claire that she lost Maisie to Santos` final order. Arriving back to the place where it all began, Santos is making one final attempt to send her raptors after Owen (though this ploy ends in failure), before being arrested by French intelligence agent Barry Sembène. Dodgson ordered his employees to call Santos, who warns them that Owen and Claire are heading to Biosyn.

Lachman said Santos is motivated by money and power, but is otherwise a mysterious character with "a lot of ambiguity". She developed a lengthy backstory for the character which is absent from the film. Trevorrow described Santos as "a badass who's at the top of her game".

Santos returns in *Jurassic World: Chaos Theory*, serving as the main antagonist. Unseen in the first season, she is revealed to be the mysterious Broker targeting the Nublar Six in the second season. In the second and third season, Brooklynn infiltrates Santos' operation to take it down from the inside, earning her trust after saving Santos' life. At the end of season three, following the events in Malta, Santos escapes from custody and attempts to reach an extraction helicopter sent by Dodgson. However, she is attacked by the Handler who regains control of the *Atrociraptor* pack, only to have Santos set a controlled *Carnotaurus* on her, killing the Handler and the *Atrociraptor* Ghost. Darius and Yaz arrive and Brooklynn distracts Santos by trying to recruit the two and then threatening their lives, buying time for Ben and Davi to bring Barry and French intelligence agents. Santos is finally arrested to face justice for her crimes, her plans ruined, while Brooklynn, Darius, Ben and Yaz take Santos' helicopter to stop Biosyn.

### Rainn Delacourt

- Portrayed by: Scott Haze

Rainn Delacourt is a poacher with ties to Soyona Santos's animal trafficking operations. In an extended scene, Owen and two Department of Fish and Wildlife officers first encounter him and some of his men who were posing as the same agents in order to steal the *Parasaurolophus* they caught, causing them having animosity. Santos sends him and a team of mercenaries to abduct Maisie and a baby *Velociraptor* known as Beta for Biosyn. Owen locates Rainn at the black market and forces him to reveal Maisie and Beta's whereabouts. Afterward, Rainn is critically wounded by a juvenile *Carnotaurus* and a *Lystrosaurus*, before being killed by a juvenile *Baryonyx*, with Owen letting Rainn to die out of spite for what he did to Maisie.

In *Jurassic World: Chaos Theory*, Rainn is mentioned by Santos who tells Dodgson that she will send him rather than the Handler to capture Maisie and Beta.

### Charlotte Lockwood

- Portrayed by: Elva Trill (adult), Isabella Sermon (young)

Charlotte Lockwood is the daughter of Sir Benjamin Lockwood and the mother of Maisie Lockwood. In *Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom*, she is mentioned to have died in a car accident. She made her onscreen debut in *Jurassic World Dominion*, through video footage shot before her death. In the latter film, Charlotte is revealed to have worked as a geneticist with Dr. Henry Wu at the InGen facility on Isla Sorna. It is also revealed that Charlotte actually died of a genetic disease while her daughter Maisie, a genetic match of herself, was young.


## Appearing in *Rebirth*

These characters are introduced in the seventh film, *Jurassic World Rebirth* (2025).

### Zora Bennett

- Portrayed by: Scarlett Johansson

Zora Bennett is the film's main protagonist, and a skilled ex-military covert operative expert. She is initially contacted by Martin Krebs to lead a mission to retrieve DNA samples from the three largest remaining dinosaurs on the planet which will be used to create a new heart medication. After she meets him in his car and he convinces her to come with him to meet their team's paleontologist, also reminding her that her own mother died of heart problems, she agrees, and talks to an old friend of hers, Duncan Kincaid, to assist in the mission. They haggle with Martin over how much they are to be paid for the mission, and depart, bringing along a few of Duncan's colleagues, including Bobby Atwater, who she is implied to have a romantic past with.

While tracking the first prehistoric creature, the *Mosasaurus*, the team receives a distress call from a stranded family, and she suggests they temporarily divert to rescue them, which the majority agree with. Upon finding the family was shipwrecked by the *Mosasaurus*, they find it quickly, and after the paleontologist, Dr. Henry Loomis, chains her to a spot where she can extract the DNA with a special dart, she manages to get a sample from the *Mosasaurus*. As she stores the sample, Henry suggests to her that they may distribute the medicine freely instead of giving it to a company which controls who gets it and who doesn't, but she is uninterested. After the team's ship is forced aground and two are killed, as well as being separated from the family altogether, she reveals to the survivors that she employed a rescue helicopter to circle the center of the island in 24 hours, leaving them that much time to recover the two other samples.

On the way to retrieve the second sample, she confronts Martin over seemingly having left one of the family to die. He denies it, and the conversation is cut off when they are distracted by an eel, though she does not appear to believe his story. After easily getting the second sample from a *Titanosaurus* and being awed by its majesty, she and two other members of the team attempt to extract the last sample from a *Quetzalcoatlus* egg. They rappel to the nest, and she asks Henry about ways to distribute the medicine to as many people as possible, finding that if it was released open-source with no patent everyone would have it, but no money would be made from it. After extracting the sample they are then attacked by the parent *Quetzalcoatlus* but saved by another mercenary, who distracts the creature and is killed by it shortly after while they escape, her rappelling down the cliff where she reunites with the team, including Henry, who fell with the sample.

She then leads the survivors to the helipad, where they reunite with the family that was separated from them earlier. Waiting for the helicopter, she finds that Martin deliberately would have let one of the family die, and confronts him, but he takes the samples and holds her at gunpoint. They are then attacked by *Mutadons*, and she hides under a car with Martin, who pushes her out and flees, though she manages to take his gun and later kill one of the *Mutadons* that attacked a member of the family. After the helicopter is destroyed by the *Distortus rex* which also kills Martin, she and Duncan manage to trap the *Mutadons* in a tunnel before getting to a boat and escaping with the samples which Zora recovers from Martin's remains. Duncan separates from the group to lure the *Distortus rex* away against her wishes, but she notices he survived this ordeal and has the group rescue him, before they leave the island. On the way back to civilization, Zora and Henry agree to distribute the medicine without a patent.

### Dr. Henry Loomis

- Portrayed by: Jonathan Bailey

Dr. Henry Loomis is a paleontologist and was a student of Dr. Alan Grant. Besides his expertise on paleontology, he is inventive and able to build remarkable devices. He is introduced working at a museum, having to close the dinosaur exhibit due to low attendances, where he is approached by Zora Bennett and Martin Krebs, the latter of whom is an executive at the pharmaceutical company Parker-Genix who has recruited Bennett for a mission to retrieve dinosaur DNA, as Henry has advised them that the DNA of the three largest remaining dinosaur species could be used for a medication to cure heart disease. Henry is convinced by Martin to come along on the mission.

Heading to Ile St. Hubert, the island the dinosaurs are on, by ship, Henry's attachment to the dinosaurs is shown when he comes into conflict with Bobby Atwater, the team's security expert, over his willingness to kill the dinosaurs, calling it a sin. After a detour to rescue a stranded family, the group finds the first dinosaur to extract DNA from, the *Mosasaurus*, and after Henry offers to be the one to do it, Zora shows him how it would be done, and he lets her do it instead. He chains her to the deck, and when she drops the equipment the first time she tries, he gives her a replacement, and she successfully extracts the sample. When storing it, he suggests to her that they could distribute the medicine to the world instead of letting the company decide, but she does not appear to agree. Shortly afterward, the ship is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* that hunt alongside the *Mosasaurus*, which Henry is fascinated by, recognizing it as symbiosis. After getting to shallow water, he and the crew, separated from the family, jump out and get to shore as the boat is destroyed. When Martin admits to the team that the island was an R&D site for InGen where the mutant dinosaurs too ugly or scary for the theme park were kept, he is disgusted, even more so when Martin admits the reason they weren't simply destroyed was because they were expensive to create and InGen couldn't justify losing the money to their investors.

Travelling through the jungle to get to the location where the second sample could be extracted, he is insulted when Martin calls the dinosaurs stupid, pointing out that they lasted for millions of years, while humans, despite being more intelligent, are driving themselves and the planet to destruction quicker. Henry accompanies the team to a field where they see a pair of *Titanosaurs* mating, and Zora extracts the second sample. He is amazed by this, saying he never thought he'd see dinosaurs in the wild. Later, when the team gets to a vantage point, he reveals his plan to get the third necessary DNA sample, *Quetzalcoatlus*, from an egg instead of from a full-grown specimen, since it is a flying carnivore. He mentions that he frequently exercises at a climbing wall, and he, Zora and another mercenary rappel down to the nest where he extracts a sample from an egg. While he extracts, Zora asks him about how to distribute the medicine, and he points out that giving it, and the rights to it, to Parker-Genix or any other company would make them rich, but the company would decide who gets the medication, while distributing it open-source, without a patent would allow anyone to be cured but no one would make money. The parent *Quetzalcoatlus* returns and attacks them, causing them to nearly lose the sample before it is distracted by the other mercenary, who it kills. Henry manages to save the sample but falls from the cliff when his rope breaks, but lands in a pool of water and recovers it, being reunited with the team shortly after.

Following this, he accompanies the team to the center, where Zora has informed them a rescue helicopter will come. They reunite with the family and he witnesses Martin take the suitcase containing the samples from Zora and wait for the helicopter. The group is then attacked by *Mutadons*, and he and Duncan Kincaid, the ship's captain, are overlooked by the helicopter, but he manages to signal it with a flare. However, when it returns for them, it is destroyed by the *Distortus rex*. Henry and Duncan reunite with the family and flee through a tunnel, where they eventually escape after being saved by Zora, who also manages to recover the samples from Martin's corpse after he is killed by the *Distortus rex*. When they manage to find a boat, Duncan leads the predator away, and Henry convinces Zora to come with him and the family instead. However, they find that Duncan has survived after the *Distortus rex* leaves, and save him. Heading off the island on the boat, Henry and Zora decide to distribute the medicine without a patent.

### Duncan Kincaid

- Portrayed by: Mahershala Ali

Duncan Kincaid is Zora's longtime friend who is a mercenary and the leader of the expedition. After Zora agrees to Martin's request to extract DNA samples from the three largest remaining dinosaurs, she, Martin and Henry Loomis, the team's paleontologist, meet Duncan at a bar in Suriname, where he works with Zora to get more money out of Martin, agreeing to the mission as he still hasn't completely paid off his boat, the *Essex*. He also brings his crew along, consisting of boat driver LeClerc, lookout Nina, and security chief Bobby Atwater, who is implied to have a romantic past with Zora. He also mentions that he outlived his own son, and after the boy's death, his wife Amelia left him, unable to handle the constant reminder of losing her child. His loss also makes him extremely protective of children.

Duncan leads the team out to Ile St. Hubert, but after they receive a mayday signal from another boat, argues with Martin over whether to help the family. He claims that while Martin is paying for the mission, it's his boat, and diverts course, rescuing the stranded Delgado family. After finding the first dinosaur to extract a sample from, the *Mosasaurus*, he drives the boat alongside it while Zora gets the sample. After the boat is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* alongside the *Mosasaurus*, he steers the boat toward the island, knowing he can outpace the *Spinosaurs* and the *Mosasaurus* cannot go in shallow water. However, he is forced to crash it on the island following the loss of Bobby and Nina, while the family jumps overboard.

Duncan accompanies the team through the jungle and is amazed when they find a herd of *Titanosaurus*, from one of which Zora extracts the second sample. After this, they head to the mountains, and he and Martin lower the others down to the nest of a *Quetzalcoatlus* so they can get the last sample. After the *Quetzalcoatlus* attacks LeClerc, Duncan and Martin attempt to pull him up but fail to save him from being swallowed alive, and barely manage to escape the creature by heading into a tunnel they saw earlier, which brings them to the bottom of the mountain where they reunite with Zora and Henry, who have successfully gotten the last sample.

The group then heads to the center of the island, which contains a workers' village with a helipad that Zora has informed them a helicopter will land at that night. They reunite with the family there, and Duncan is relieved to see them alive. After Martin is called out for nearly leaving one of the family to die, the group is attacked by *Mutadons*, and Duncan and Henry flee to a lab where they notice a boat. Following the helicopter's destruction by the *Distortus rex*, Duncan and Henry reunite with the family in a tunnel and are saved from a *Mutadon* by Zora, before he manages to trap the other dinosaurs in the tunnel. After Zora retrieves the samples from a now-dead Martin, the group heads to the boat, where Duncan, against Zora's urging, lures the *Distortus rex* away with a flare to allow the others to escape. He is thought to have been killed doing this, but is shown to have survived and is rescued by the others, before they leave the island together.

In the original script, Duncan was intended to die saving the group from the *Distortus rex*, but due to Mahershala Ali's star status and the possibility of a sequel, Universal decided that he should survive and had an additional scene filmed showing this, which made it into the final film.

### Martin Krebs

- Portrayed by: Rupert Friend

Martin Krebs is the film's main antagonist and a pharmaceutical representative at Parker-Genix who recruits Zora Bennett and Dr. Henry Loomis on a top-secret mission to retrieve DNA samples from the world's largest dinosaurs (consisting of the aquatic *Mosasaurus*, terrestrial *Titanosaurus*, and avian *Quetzalcoatlus*) which he claims hold the key to a new heart disease treatment. He is first seen in a traffic jam caused by a dying *Apatosaurus*, complaining, before he meets Zora, who sneaks into his car, and he promises to reward her well if she does it for him. He brings her along to persuade Henry to join the mission, again manipulating her by reminding her that her own mother died of heart disease. After they agree, she leads him to an old friend, Duncan Kincaid, who owns a boat and agrees to bring them to the island they need to get the samples from, if he doubles their pay, which he agrees to. After meeting Duncan's security chief, Bobby Atwater, the group heads for the island.

On the way, they receive a distress call from a stranded family, and while Martin and Bobby want to ignore it to focus on the mission, Duncan overrules them as captain and they rescue the family, the Delgados. Shortly after, they manage to extract a sample from the *Mosasaurus* but are immediately afterward attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* that it hunts alongside. When one of the Delgados attempts to call for help, Martin stops her, wanting to keep the mission secret. While trying to explain to Teresa, she tries to push Martin, causing her to stumble backwards and cling to the rail, eventually falling off while Martin lays stunned on the ground. While the rest of the family jump off to help her, Martin remains on the boat as it heads for shallower water, but jumps off when it crashes. After they arrive on the beach having lost two crew members, Martin admits that the island was an R&D site where the dinosaurs too ugly or dangerous for a theme park were left, and that they were not destroyed because they were expensive to create and InGen couldn't risk losing their investors. Informed by Zora there will be a rescue helicopter at the helipad in the center of the island in 24 hours, Martin joins the team to collect the remaining samples before then.

Along with the team, Martin treks through the jungle and is at one point confronted by Zora over not having helped the girl. He claims he tried but couldn't get to her in time, though she does not appear to believe him, before the conversation ends when he is startled by a large eel brushing by his leg. Continuing on, Martin makes a comment about the dinosaurs being stupid and is called out by Henry, who points out that for all humanity's intelligence, they are destroying themselves and the planet in less time than the dinosaurs died out. Shortly after, Martin notices a small helicopter crashed in a tree, its pilot dead, and he discreetly takes a pistol from the corpse. The group reaches a field containing a herd of *Titanosaurus*, and he watches in awe as Zora extracts the second sample from one. The group then heads to the mountains to get the third sample, and after reaching a mountain containing a *Quetzalcoatlus* nest, Martin and Duncan lower the others to it to get a sample from an egg. He and Duncan attempt to help LeClerc, one of Duncan's crew, escape the parent *Quetzalcoatlus*, but fail, barely escaping it when it attacks them. After reuniting with Zora and Henry, who have the sample, they head for the helipad.

At the helipad, they are reunited with the family, and he is accused of leaving them to die. He denies it, but afterward takes the samples and holds them at gunpoint with the gun he took, saying they will just wait for the helicopter. However, the group is attacked by *Mutadons*, and he ends up hiding under a car with Zora. He kicks her out and attempts to kill one with the gun, but fails, and she takes it, though he escapes in the car with the samples. Heading to the port, he is forced off the road by an *Ankylosaurus* and ends up crashing near the tunnel the other survivors have ended up at. The *Distortus rex*, which followed them after destroying the helicopter, notices him, and eats him as he attempts to escape, dropping his arm with the samples still in it, which Zora recovers.

### Reuben Delgado

- Portrayed by: Manuel Garcia-Rulfo

Reuben Delgado is the father of a shipwrecked civilian family. He first appears on his boat, the *Mariposa*, with his teenage daughter Teresa, his younger daughter Isabella and Teresa's boyfriend Xavier Dobbs, who he dislikes for being lazy. He is implied to be divorced from the mother of his daughters, and Teresa is protective of her sister and serves as a surrogate mother to her. Reuben took his family to a sailing trip as one last family adventure before Teresa goes to college. He first is irritated with Xavier not pulling his weight and Teresa for defending him. After witnessing sails in the ocean, the boat is capsized by the *Mosasaurus*, and Reuben protects his daughters and tries to help Xavier, who is still in the boat. After Xavier fails to get the emergency radio out, Reuben tells him to just save himself, however, Xavier manages to save the radio.

The next day, after spending the night on the capsized boat calling for help, Reuben and his family are rescued by the crew of the *Essex*, who, unknown to them, are on a mission to extract DNA from three dinosaurs, including the *Mosasaurus*. When Reuben tells them that the *Mosasaurus* was what capsized their boat, the team finds it and extracts its DNA, keeping Reuben and his family below deck not to jeopardize the secrecy of the mission. However, they do notice the ship chasing the *Mosasaurus*, which unnerves Isabella and Xavier, who Reuben tries to calm.

However, when the *Mosasaurus* attacks the ship accompanied by a group of *Spinosaurus*, Reuben has Teresa send a mayday signal, however, she is stopped from doing so by the mission's benefactor, Martin Krebs, who wants the mission to remain secret, and he causes her to fall overboard. Seeing this, and Xavier jumping in after her, Reuben takes Isabella and follows. He injures his leg doing this, but they reunite with the other two and swim through an underwater cave to get to the island, where Teresa tells him that Martin let her fall out. Reuben takes a long stick for help walking and decides to follow the pipes they have seen to the geothermal powered village that the ship's crew mentioned. He is briefly disappointed when Xavier mentions that he has weed, which Teresa tries to brush off as him joking. Spending the night in the jungle, Reuben thanks Xavier for saving Teresa, and when Xavier expresses inadequacy over not knowing why she likes him, reassures him that he is good enough.

The next morning, the family finds a river with a shed on the other side. Teresa crosses and finds an emergency raft inside, but they notice they are near a sleeping *Tyrannosaurus rex*. Despite Reuben, along with Xavier, telling her not to, she activates the raft, attracting its attention. They manage to get in the raft and escape, pursued by the *T. rex*, which knocks them out of it. He manages to avoid the dinosaur and regroups with Teresa and Xavier after getting through a rock formation it cannot follow. He briefly thinks Isabella was killed, but finds she survived by hiding under the overturned raft, and the *T. rex* gives up its pursuit.

That night, the family makes it to the village and reunites with the remains of the team, but are held at gunpoint by Martin after Teresa accuses him of leaving her to die. When the group is attacked by *Mutadons*, he and his family hide in a convenience store, but are forced into an underground tunnel when the mutant dinosaurs follow them. Escaping with the help of the mercenaries and Isabella, they make it to a boat at the dock, which Reuben starts and drives the group away while one of the mercenaries diverts the *Distortus rex* which killed Martin after he abandoned them. When the mercenary survives his ordeal, Reuben redirects the boat to rescue him, and drives the boat away from the island, intending to return home.

### Teresa Delgado

- Portrayed by: Luna Blaise

Teresa Delgado is Reuben's eldest daughter. At the time of the film, she has been accepted to New York University, and is on a sailing trip with her father, younger sister and boyfriend to have one last family adventure before she goes to college. Her father Reuben disapproves of her boyfriend Xavier, and she tries to defend him. Like her sister, Teresa is afraid of dinosaurs and is openly hostile against them. When their sailboat is capsized by the *Mosasaurus*, she and her family are stranded on it until they are rescued the next morning by a team of mercenaries on a mission to retrieve DNA samples from three dinosaurs, including the *Mosasaurus*. After her father tells them the boat was capsized by the prehistoric creature they are looking for, she and her family are left below deck while the team retrieves its DNA.

However, when the ship is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* that hunt alongside the *Mosasaurus*, her father tells her to use the radio to call for help. She tries to, but is stopped from doing so by the team's benefactor, Martin Krebs, who wants the mission to remain secret. She pushes Martin, but stumbles and falls overboard. When she calls for Martin to help her, he does not, and she falls out. Xavier jumps out after her to save her, and does so, pulling her to a rock formation near the island, and they are shortly joined by her father and sister.

After they reach the island through a cave, she tells her family that Martin was trying to kill her (despite him not doing so), and they follow geothermal pipes to get to the center of the island where the team told them there is a village. Along the way, Xavier mentions having weed, which she quickly plays off as him joking, though it's unclear if he was. Her father doesn't appreciate it, but does appreciate him saving her life, and assures him he's good enough even if he doesn't know why Teresa likes him.

On the way to the village, Teresa and her family arrive at a river and see a shed on the other side. She goes across and finds an emergency raft inside, but is nearly attacked by a *Dilophosaurus* which flees after noticing a sleeping *Tyrannosaurus rex*. When she activates the raft against Reuben and Xavier's warnings, the *T. rex* wakes up and notices them as they try to leave in the raft, and pursues them. She is knocked out of the raft but manages to get through a rock formation that the *T. rex* cannot follow, and reunites with her family.

That night, the family arrive at the village and regroup with the remaining mercenaries, during which Teresa reveals that Martin let her fall overboard, causing Martin to take the collected DNA samples and hold the group at gunpoint. They are then attacked by *Mutadons*, and she and her family hide in a convenience store, eventually escaping into an underground tunnel where they are reunited with a couple of the mercenaries and trapped by the pursuing animals. After escaping the tunnel and trapping the animals inside, they head for a boat at the dock, picking up the samples from the now-dead Martin along the way. After one of the mercenaries diverts the *Distortus rex* which killed Martin away from them, the rest of the group make it to the boat, and after recovering him, the group leaves the island.

### Isabella Delgado

- Portrayed by: Audrina Miranda

Isabella Delgado is Reuben's youngest daughter. Like her family, she initially has a fear of all of dinosaurs. Along with her father, her older sister Teresa and Teresa's boyfriend Xavier, she goes on a sailing trip as one last family vacation before Teresa goes to college. However, their boat is capsized by the *Mosasaurus*, and they are left to drift for a night until they are rescued by a crew of mercenaries attempting to extract the DNA of certain dinosaurs, including the *Mosasaurus*. She and her family are left below deck while the team, following the *Mosasaurus*, extracts its DNA. They notice the ship chasing the *Mosasaurus*, and she is scared by it.

However, when the ship is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* accompanying the *Mosasaurus*, she witnesses one of the crew being killed when he tries to fight back, and afterward, her sister is knocked off the ship and her boyfriend jumps off to help her. Isabella and her father jump overboard to join them, and reunite with them near the island. After getting onto the island, Teresa tells them that Martin Krebs, the mission's benefactor, knocked her overboard. They decide to follow geothermal pipes in the hope they will lead to the workers' village that the mercenaries mentioned.

On the way, they encounter an *Aquilops*, which scares Isabella before her father pointed out that it is an herbivore then scared off by Teresa. That night, the *Aquilops* finds them again, and stays after Isabella gives the ceratopsian a piece of licorice, not fearing of the small herbivorous dinosaur. The next morning, when they move on, it stays and Isabella names it Dolores, in times being her sentinel, warning her nearby carnivorous dinosaurs. When the family reaches a river which has a shed on the other side, Dolores runs away. Teresa finds an emergency raft in the shed but accidentally wakes up a nearby sleeping *Tyrannosaurus rex* by activating it, and they flee, pursued by the *T. rex*. They are knocked out of the raft by it and Isabella disappears. When the others manage to get past a nearby rock formation where the dinosaur cannot follow, she is revealed to be alive, having survived by hiding under the overturned raft, and is pulled through before the *T. rex* gets her.

That night, the family arrive at the workers' village, reuniting with the team, but Martin holds them all at gunpoint after Teresa calls him out for leaving her to die. They are then attacked by *Mutadons*, and Isabella and her family hide in a convenience store, where Isabella encounters Dolores again, taking her along when they are forced into an underground tunnel. After the *Mutadons* follow them in, they reunite with the mercenaries and are saved by Zora, who kills one of the dinosaurs. However, they are trapped on one side of a locked gate by the *Mutadons*, with the *Distortus rex* that killed Martin on the other side. Isabella, being small and the only one who can fit through, pushes through the gate to the controls on the other side and opens it for the others, and the mercenaries manage to close it quickly, trapping the *Mutadons* inside. Taking Dolores with her again, Isabella goes with her family and the mercenaries to a boat at the dock, where after one of them diverts the *Distortus rex*, they leave the island.

### Xavier Dobbs

- Portrayed by: David Iacono

Xavier Dobbs is Teresa Delgado's boyfriend. He accompanies Teresa, her father and her sister on one last family vacation before she goes off to college. Her father initially dislikes him due to his laziness. His first appearance has him refusing to help steer the boat, claiming to be tired, to Reuben's displeasure, while Teresa tries to defend him. However, when the boat is capsized by the *Mosasaurus*, he, stuck below deck, attempts to escape with Reuben's help, but is unable to find the emergency radio they can use to make a distress call. While Reuben eventually tells him to forget the radio and just save himself, he does not, managing to get the radio out and to the family before joining them on the capsized boat.

The next day, they are rescued by a group of mercenaries on a mission to retrieve the DNA of certain dinosaurs, including the *Mosasaurus*. After Reuben tells them why the boat capsized, they track the *Mosasaurus* and collect its DNA while Xavier and the family are below deck. Xavier, like Isabella, becomes unnerved while the ship chases the *Mosasaurus*, and Reuben tries to calm them. He is also uncomfortable with Martin Krebs, correctly suspecting him being corrupt. When the group is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* hunting with the *Mosasaurus*, Teresa falls overboard, and he immediately grabs a kickboard and life jacket and jumps in to save her, getting her to a nearby rock formation and shortly afterward being joined by Reuben and Isabella. Getting to the island, he finds out that she was pushed overboard by Martin Krebs, the team's benefactor. When Reuben asks if anyone has anything that can help, he claims he has weed, which Reuben dislikes, though Teresa claims he was just joking.

While following geothermal pipes to get to the workers' village mentioned by the mercenaries, the group stops for a night, and Reuben thanks him for saving Teresa. When he confides his worry about not being good enough for her, Reuben reassures him that he is. Shortly afterward, Xavier leaves to urinate, and once a safe distance away he is stalked by two *Velociraptors*, but one is attacked and killed by a *Mutadon*, causing the other to flee, before they can attack him.

The next day, the family gets to a river with a shed on the other side, which Teresa crosses to find an emergency raft. They notice a *Tyrannosaurus rex* sleeping nearby, and he and Reuben tell her not to open the raft, but she does, waking the dinosaur, which notices them as they float down the river. It chases them, but they escape through a rock formation it cannot follow.

That night, they arrive at the village, where they reunite with the remaining mercenaries. Teresa reveals to them what Martin did, which causes Martin to hold the group at gunpoint. They are then attacked by *Mutadons*, and he and the family hide in a nearby convenience store, escaping into an underground tunnel when they are spotted. In the tunnel, they are saved by the mercenaries, who manage to trap the other *Mutadons* within. After Martin is killed by the *Distortus rex*, the rest of the group heads for a boat at the dock, while one of the mercenaries lures the dinosaur away. They take the boat, rescue the one who lured it away after it leaves, and leave the island.

The character was specifically conceived by writer David Koepp to be initially unlikable. Iacono tried to strongly emphasize this trait early in filming, to the point that director Gareth Edwards asked him to scale back. Iacono recalled that Edwards "was, like, 'You're doing great. But I don't want people to hate you too much because we need to win them back over by the end. So if you can be a *little* bit more likable, that would be appreciated.'"

### LeClerc

- Portrayed by: Béchir Sylvain

LeClerc is a mercenary who is the co-pilot and deckhand of the *Essex*. He has a close friendship with Nina, and speaks almost exclusively in French due to being Haitian. On the boat, headed to the island where the samples are to be collected, he falls asleep, leaving Duncan on watch all night, though he promises to make it up to him. When forced to flee the *Mosasaurus*, LeClerc is sent to the engine room, as the engines are overheating as Duncan drives the ship faster, and as a result is the only one still on board, aside from Duncan, when the ship crashes on the island. After Nina is killed by a *Spinosaurus* he takes her bloody scarf, and accompanies the team when they recover a sample from the *Titanosaurus*. When recovering the third sample, from a *Quetzalcoatlus* egg, he, Zora and Henry rappel down the side of a cliff to reach its nest, and he remains outside to secure the way back up by removing dangerous rocks and hammering in handholds. Unfortunately, the parent *Quetzalcoatlus*, attracted by the noise, returns to the nest and attacks Zora and Henry when it sees them with its eggs. LeClerc distracts it by throwing his hammer at its head, which causes it to come after him instead, and he screams for Duncan and Martin to pull him up. Unfortunately, the *Quetzalcoatlus* climbs after him, and by the time he gets to the top it has gotten him in its mouth. It then swallows him whole, still alive, in front of Duncan and Martin. After escaping it and getting the sample, Duncan expresses sadness at his death.

### Nina

- Portrayed by: Philippine Velge

Nina is a mercenary who is the co-pilot and deckhand of the *Essex*. She has a close friendship with LeClerc. On the boat, headed to the island where the samples are to be collected, she serves as lookout, letting Zora know when to collect the sample from the *Mosasaurus*. When the boat is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus* accompanying the *Mosasaurus*, she is nearly killed when knocked off her post, but survives and makes it to the island. However, when pushing a raft full of supplies to the island, she does not notice a *Spinosaurus* on the beach, and when she goes behind the raft to get it ashore, she is grabbed from behind and eaten, leaving behind only her scarf, which is picked up by LeClerc.

### Bobby Atwater

- Portrayed by: Ed Skrein

Bobby Atwater is a mercenary and head of security on board the *Essex*. He is first met when Zora and Martin meet with Duncan, playing with some kids, and appears to be in on the scheme to haggle for more money, which they tell him is unnecessary. He is briefly implied to have a romantic past with Zora. On the expedition, when the team receives the mayday call from the Delgado family, he is the only one other than Martin who wants to ignore it in favor of completing the mission. He also disagrees with Henry Loomis over killing dinosaurs, when he reveals he brought a gun which shoots neurotoxins to deal with any threats. When the boat is attacked by a group of *Spinosaurus*, hunting alongside the *Mosasaurus*, he attempts to shoot them. As he is firing at one of them as it swims near the boat he fails to notice another coming up behind him and it leaps from the water to snatch him off of Duncan's boat. He tries to save himself by grabbing a doorway, but is quickly pulled off and taken out to sea and eaten by the *Spinosaurus* in front of a horrified Isabella Delgado. Zora expresses grief at his death.

Koepp initially planned to feature Bobby more heavily, having him eventually partner with Martin to betray the other characters. According to Koepp, "I was just typing one day and the thing leaped out of the water and ate him and I'm like, well, he's gone."


## Appearing in *Battle at Big Rock*

These characters only appear in the short film, *Battle at Big Rock* (2019), which focuses on a family encountering dinosaurs during a camping trip.

- Dennis (André Holland) and Mariana (Natalie Martinez) are the parents of the family.
- Kadasha (Melody Hurd) is Dennis's daughter and Mariana's stepdaughter.
- Mateo (Pierson Salvador) is Mariana's son and Dennis's stepson.
- Greg (Chris Finlayson) is a friend of the family.


## Video games

Cast members from *The Lost World: Jurassic Park*, including Jeff Goldblum and Richard Attenborough, reprised their roles through voice acting in the 1997 video game *Chaos Island: The Lost World*. Attenborough also lent his voice to the 1998 video game *Trespasser*.

The cast of *Jurassic World* provided their voices for the 2015 video game *Lego Jurassic World*. In addition, Bryce Dallas Howard, BD Wong, Sam Neill, Laura Dern, and Goldblum reprised their roles for the 2018 game *Jurassic World Evolution*.
