---
title: "1977 in baseball (part 3/5)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1977_in_baseball
domain: closer-baseball
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: closer baseball
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 3/5
---

# 1977 in baseball

- June 1 – Pitcher Jim Bouton is released by the Chicago White Sox without ever appearing in a game for the team.
- June 3 – Leading by two runs in the bottom of the ninth inning, the Baltimore Orioles escape a no-out loaded bases jam when John Wathan hits into a run-scoring triple play to end the game, giving the O's a 7–6 victory over Kansas City at Royals Stadium. Wathan's sacrifice fly to right field is the first out, but it scores Al Cowens from third base; however, Freddie Patek, the runner on first, is caught in a run-down on the throw (out #2) and Dave Nelson, stranded off third base, is tagged out (out #3) by Mark Belanger, completing the 9–6–4–6 triple play.
- June 5 – On Old-Timer's Day, the Los Angeles Dodgers retire the #24 jersey of former manager Walter Alston, who retired in September 1976 after 23 years (which yielded four World Series championships) at the team's helm.
- June 7 – The Chicago White Sox select 2019 Baseball Hall of Fame inductee Harold Baines with the #1 pick in the 1977 MLB draft. White Sox owner Bill Veeck had first seen Baines play Little League ball and has followed his career. Pitcher Bill Gullickson is taken with the second pick by the Montreal Expos, and the Milwaukee Brewers take University of Minnesota infielder Paul Molitor (a 2004 Hall of Fame inductee) with the third pick. Danny Ainge, a potential pro basketball player, is picked in the 15th round by the Toronto Blue Jays.
- June 8:
  - For the fourth time in his career, Nolan Ryan strikes out 19 batters in a game, doing so against the Toronto Blue Jays.
  - For the 14th time in his 17 years as owner of the Kansas City/Oakland Athletics, Charlie Finley changes managers, firing Jack McKeon (26–27) after only 53 games and replacing him with Bobby Winkles. Denuded of talent by free agency, the Athletics were thought to be over-achieving under McKeon but Finley fires him anyway.
  - The Blue Jays purchase the contract of five-time Gold Glove Award-winning third baseman Doug Rader from the San Diego Padres.
- June 9 – Carl Yastrzemski doubles against the Baltimore Orioles—the 500th two-bagger in his Hall-of-Fame career.
- June 12 – Before a crowd of only 10,439 at the Astrodome, the New York Mets beat the Houston Astros 3–1. Tom Seaver picks up the win and goes 7–3 for the season. It would be six years until Seaver again wins a game in a Met uniform.
- June 13 – The California Angels and Baltimore Orioles exchange right-handed relief pitchers, when Dick Drago is sent to the Orioles for Dyar Miller.
- June 15:
  - At the trading deadline, the New York Mets deal future Baseball Hall of Fame pitcher Tom Seaver to the Cincinnati Reds for pitcher Pat Zachry, infielder Doug Flynn and outfielders Steve Henderson and Dan Norman. They then trade infielder Mike Phillips to the St. Louis Cardinals for outfielder Joel Youngblood, and send slugging outfielder Dave Kingman to the San Diego Padres for minor league pitcher Paul Siebert and utilityman Bobby Valentine, who will one day will manage the Mets. The day will forever be known in Mets lore as the "Midnight Massacre".
  - The Milwaukee Brewers send two minor leaguers, pitcher Rick O'Keeffe and infielder Garry Pyka, to the Reds for veteran left-hander Mike Caldwell, 28, who will be a 22-game winner in 1978 and go 102–80 in eight seasons in a Brewer uniform.
  - The Philadelphia Phillies acquire outfielder Bake McBride and pitcher Steve Waterbury from the St. Louis Cardinals in exchange for southpaw Tom Underwood and outfielders Rick Bosetti and Dane Iorg. McBride, 28, is a former National League Rookie of the Year and 1976 All-Star who will be a key member of the Phillies' 1977–1978 National League East champions and 1980 World Series champions.
  - The New York Yankees obtain right-handed power hitter Cliff Johnson from the Houston Astros for pitcher Randy Niemann, infielder Mike Fischlin and a "PTBNL" (first baseman Dave Bergman, added to the deal on November 23, 1977).
- June 16 – The Los Angeles Dodgers purchase the contract of pitcher Bobby Castillo from the Kansas City Royals. Castillo will go on to be known as the pitcher who helped Fernando Valenzuela learn how to throw a screwball.
- June 18:
  - Frank Robinson's term as manager of the Cleveland Indians ends after 2⅓ seasons when he is replaced by coach Jeff Torborg at the team's helm. MLB's first black manager, Robinson has compiled a 186–189 (.496) record: his 1976 Indians had finished a promising 81–78, but the Tribe are only 26–31 (.456) when the change is made.
  - In the sixth inning of an NBC-televised game against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, New York Yankees manager Billy Martin pulls right fielder Reggie Jackson and replaces him with Paul Blair after Jackson misplays Jim Rice's fly ball for a double. As Jackson returns to the dugout, he and Martin exchange words, Martin arguing that Jackson had shown him up by "not hustling" on the play. The Yankees manager lunges at Jackson (who is 18 years younger than Martin and outweighs him by about 40 pounds), and has to be restrained by coaches Yogi Berra and Elston Howard—with the NBC cameras showing the confrontation to the entire country. The Red Sox win, 10–4.
- June 19 – The Red Sox complete a three-game sweep of the New York Yankees at Fenway Park, 11–1 behind Ferguson Jenkins. Boston slugs five home runs, for a total of 16 blasts in the three-game set. They take a 2½-game lead over the Yankees and Baltimore Orioles in the American League East.
- June 20 – On ABC's Monday Night Baseball, the Detroit Tigers' Mark Fidrych beats the Yankees 2–1 at home, allowing 3 hits, no walks, and striking out nine.
- June 21 – Frank Lucchesi is fired as the manager of the Texas Rangers with a 31–31 record following a 9–5 loss to the Minnesota Twins. Lucchesi blames his firing on his spring-training altercation with former Ranger Lenny Randle, and sues Randle for $200,000.
- June 22 – Eddie Stanky replaces Lucchesi as the Rangers' manager. He pilots the Rangers to a 10–8 triumph over the Minnesota Twins at Metropolitan Stadium, and then surprisingly quits his post a mere 18 hours after being hired, one of the shortest tenures in MLB history. Stanky returns to his successful college career as head baseball coach of the University of South Alabama.
- June 24:
  - After hitting what appears to be a three-run homer in the third inning at Metropolitan Stadium, Ralph Garr is called out for passing teammate Jim Essian, who waited at first base to make sure the ball cleared the fence. The umpires award the Chicago White Sox outfielder, known as "Road Runner", a two-run single, but the mistake proves costly when Chicago loses the game in Minnesota, 7–6.
  - In a 6–5 win over the visiting San Francisco Giants, Houston Astros first baseman Bob Watson hits for the cycle.
- June 25 – A group of former Chicago Cubs flatten the Hall of Famers 5–1 in a pregame exhibition. The ex-Cubs include Billy Jurges, Stan Hack, and Ron Santo; the 24 Hall of Famers are one of the greatest collections outside of Cooperstown, as players like Joe DiMaggio, Ralph Kiner and Warren Spahn perform at Wrigley Field for one last time. In the official game, the NL East-leading Cubs score four runs in the ninth to overtake the New York Mets, 5–4, improving their record to 44–22, seven games ahead of the Pittsburgh Pirates.
- June 26:
  - The New York Yankees "flip the script" on the Boston Red Sox by sweeping their rivals in a three-game set at Yankee Stadium. After beating Boston 6–5 (11 innings) Friday and 5–1 (behind Mike Torrez) on Saturday, they finish the sweep today, 5–4, with ace reliever Sparky Lyle gaining his second victory of the series. The Yankees narrow Boston's division lead to two games, and launch the Red Sox on a nine-game losing streak.
  - Pete Vukovich pitches the first shutout in Toronto Blue Jay history, blanking the Baltimore Orioles at Memorial Stadium, 2–0.
  - On Rod Carew Night, the Twins' first baseman goes 4-for-5 en route to scoring five runs and collecting six RBIs in Minnesota's 19–12 victory over the White Sox at Metropolitan Stadium.
- June 27 – The San Francisco Giants' Willie McCovey smashes two home runs in a ten-run sixth inning—one a grand slam off reliever Joe Hoerner—in a 14–9 victory over the Cincinnati Reds. McCovey, 39, becomes the first player in major league history to twice hit two home runs in one inning (his first time occurred on April 12, 1973), and becomes the all-time National League leader with 17 career grand slams. André Dawson, in both 1978 and 1986, will be the next player to hit two homers in the same inning.
- June 28:
  - The Texas Rangers welcome their fourth manager of the 1977 season—former longtime Baltimore Orioles third-base coach Billy Hunter—by dropping a 6–5 decision to the Athletics at the Oakland Coliseum. Hunter succeeds Frank Lucchesi, Eddie Stanky and interim pilot Connie Ryan as manager of the 34–35 Rangers. He will turn their season around by leading them to a 60–33 record and a second-place finish in the American League West.
  - At Olympic Stadium, the Chicago Cubs beat the Montreal Expos 4–2. Rick Reuschel (11–2) is the winning pitcher, while Bruce Sutter picks up his 21st save of the season. The victory represents the high-water mark for the 1977 Cubs with a 47–22 record giving them an 8½-game lead over Pittsburgh.
- June 29:
  - Willie Stargell of the Pittsburgh Pirates hits his 400th career home run when he takes St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Eric Rasmussen deep for a two-run shot in the fifth inning of a 9–1 Pirates' victory at Busch Stadium.
  - Before 51,745 fans at Tiger Stadium, Mark Fidrych fires his sixth straight complete-gate victory of 1977, defeating the Boston Red Sox 7–2. Detroit's star sophomore improves his record to 6–2 (1.83) in 70 innings pitched. But he will be hit hard in his next two starts, then shut down for the season after July 12 with what the Tigers call "tendinitis" in his pitching arm.
- June 30 – Cliff Johnson joins Joe DiMaggio and Joe Pepitone as the only players in Yankees' history to hit two home runs in the same inning. The designated hitter goes deep twice in the eighth as the Bronx Bombers score eight runs in an 11–5 win over the Toronto Blue Jays.

### July

- July 2 – For the second time in 1977, Jim Spencer ties the Chicago White Sox' club record for RBIs in a game set by Shoeless Joe Jackson in 1920, when he knocks in eight runs to help beat the Minnesota Twins at Comiskey Park, 13–8. The Chisox first baseman's two home runs enable Spencer to duplicate a feat he first accomplished May 14 against the Cleveland Indians.
- July 3 – On his 24th birthday, California Angels left-hander Frank Tanana tosses his 14th consecutive complete game with his 6–4 victory over the Oakland Athletics at Anaheim Stadium. Tanana's record after today's game is 12–5 (1.89).
- July 4:
  - At Fenway Park, the Boston Red Sox break a nine-game losing streak by bashing eight home runs in their 9–6 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays. Fred Lynn and George Scott each hit two blasts.
  - Independence Day, the unofficial midpoint of the MLB season, ends with both Chicago teams in first place in their divisions. In the National League East, the Cubs (48–28) hold a four-game lead over the Philadelphia Phillies despite a doubleheader loss to the Montreal Expos at Wrigley Field. In the American League West, the surprising White Sox (45–32) lead the Minnesota Twins by three lengths. The American League East is the tightest race, with the New York Yankees (45–35) one game in front of the Red Sox (42–34) and the Baltimore Orioles (43–36) only 1½ back. The only uncontested division is the National League West, where the Los Angeles Dodgers (54–26) hold a 10½-game bulge over the Cincinnati Reds (42–35).
- July 6 – After going 1,887 MLB at bats without a home run, Chicago Cubs outfielder Greg Gross belts a three-run homer off Montreal's Don Stanhouse, providing the winning runs in an 8–6 Chicago victory.
- July 9 – New York Mets third baseman Lenny Randle ends an extra innings marathon with the Expos at Shea Stadium in the 17th inning with a walk off home run off Will McEnaney.
- July 10 – The California Angels fire manager Norm Sherry and name coach Dave Garcia to replace him for the remainder of 1977. After a winter of high expectations—fed by the signings of marquee free agents Don Baylor, Bobby Grich and Joe Rudi—the Angels are only 39–42 (.481) and 9½ games out of first place in the American League West under Sherry.
- July 13:
  - Jim Rice slugs two homers and Butch Hobson contributes a three-rub bomb in the tenth inning, enabling the Boston Red Sox to hold onto their half-game lead in the American League East by beating the home-standing Cleveland Indians, 9–7.
  - The New York Mets trail the Chicago Cubs 2–1 in the sixth inning at Shea Stadium when the lights go out as New York City is stricken with a blackout that would last two days. The game will be resumed on September 16, with the Cubs winning 5–2.
- July 14 – Jim Wynn, aka the "Toy Cannon", is released by the New York Yankees. On July 26, the 5 ft 10 in (1.78 m) home run hitter will sign with the Milwaukee Brewers, where he finishes his MLB career.
- July 19 – In the All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium, the National League defeats the American League for the 14th time in the last 15 encounters. Don Sutton of the Los Angeles Dodgers is named MVP.
- July 21 – Sixteen years and two days removed from his MLB debut, Al Downing, best remembered as the pitcher who gave up Hank Aaron's record breaking home run, is released by the Los Angeles Dodgers, ending his MLB career.
- July 23 – Gaylord Perry and Adrian Devine combine for a 13-inning, five-hit shutout and Mike Hargrove gets the game-winning hit, an RBI single, enabling the Texas Rangers to edge the Baltimore Orioles 1–0 at Memorial Stadium. The matchup of Hall-of-Fame starting pitchers sees Jim Palmer work 11 shutout innings without gaining a decision.
- July 24 – At Dodger Stadium, New York Mets outfielder Bruce Boisclair drops Davey Lopes' two-out, ninth-inning foul pop up. Lopes then responds with a game-ending three-run home run off Bob Apodaca to give the Dodgers a 5–3 win and spoil the day for Nino Espinosa, who left the game needing just one more out for a complete-game victory.
- July 25 – Pete Rose becomes the all-time hit leader among switch-hitters when he collects his 2,881st career safety, a fourth-inning single off Pete Falcone in the Cincinnati Reds' 9–8 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals at Busch Memorial Stadium. Ex-Cardinal (and New York Giant) Frankie Frisch had established the record on August 4, 1937.
- July 28 – Just two days after pitching a complete game, 3–0 five-hit shutout for the Chicago Cubs against the Cincinnati Reds, Rick Reuschel enters the 13th inning in relief of a 15–15 tie game with the Reds at Wrigley Field. Reuschel retires two batters to end the Reds' half-inning, then leads off the bottom of the 13th with a single and scores the winning run on an RBI single by Dave Rosello. The two teams combine for 11 home runs; the Cubs' six homers include two each from Bill Buckner and George Mitterwald.

### August

- August 1 – Willie McCovey extends his own National League record when he hits his 18th career grand slam in the third inning of the Giants' 9–2 victory over Montreal.
- August 4 – For the first time since 1906, both Chicago teams are in first place this late in a season. The faltering Cubs, who had a 47–22 record on June 28, are now 61–43 and only a half-game in front of the Philadelphia Phillies in the National League East; they will skid to a mediocre 81–81 record. The White Sox, who defeat the Texas Rangers 5–4 today, are 63–41 and 3½ lengths ahead of the Minnesota Twins in the American League West; they will win 90 games, but be overwhelmed by the runaway divisional winner Kansas City Royals on August 20.
- August 5:
  - The Phillies defeat the Los Angeles Dodgers 8–3 at Veterans Stadium, while the Cubs fall to the visiting San Diego Padres 11–8. The victory powers Philadelphia into first place in their division, ending the Cubbies' stranglehold on the top spot. Moreover, it represents the third victory of the Phillies' 13-game winning skein that will see them 4½ games in front of the Pittsburgh Pirates (and seven lengths ahead of the Cubs) by August 16.
  - Kansas City Royals designated hitter John Mayberry hits for the cycle in a 12–2 win over the visiting Chicago White Sox.
- August 7 – In the second game of a doubleheader at Wrigley Field, Mick Kelleher of the Cubs and Dave Kingman of the Padres are involved in a bench-clearing brawl—a melee with a rare mismatch between the two major combatants. The 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m), 210 lb (95 kg) Kingman, angered over being hit by a Steve Renko pitch leading off the second inning, slides hard into Kelleher, the Cubs' 5 ft 9 in (1.75 m), 170 lb (77 kg) second baseman, on George Hendrick's ground ball one batter later. Kelleher responds by jumping onto Kingman's back and pummeling him with blows. Both Kelleher and Kingman are ejected from the game, which the Cubs win 9–4.
- August 9 – Doug Capilla and Pedro Borbón combine on a one-hitter, and the visiting Cincinnati Reds defeat the National League West front-runners, the Los Angeles Dodgers, 4–0. Ron Cey's seventh-inning single is the Dodgers' only safety.
- August 10 – The Pittsburgh Pirates and Chicago Cubs take 18 innings to settle matters at Three Rivers Stadium, with Pirates emerging victorious 2–1 on Ed Ott's pinch-hit sacrifice fly. Paul Reuschel excels for the Cubs with six innings of three-hit, shutout relief, while the Pirates' Goose Gossage and Grant Jackson each allow only one hit, as they combine for nine scoreless frames.
- August 12:
  - For the second consecutive day, Manny Sanguillén of the Oakland Athletics foils a no-hit bid with a single hit off the Baltimore Orioles' Jim Palmer, who settles for a two-hit 6–0 victory. Yesterday's hit was off the New York Yankees' Mike Torrez, who finished with a 3–0 two-hitter.
  - The Cleveland Indians' Dennis Eckersley one-hits the Milwaukee Brewers at Municipal Stadium 2–0. Cecil Cooper's sixth-inning triple keeps Eckersley from recording his second no-hitter of 1977; he had tossed a no-no against the California Angels on May 30.
  - At Wrigley Field, the first-place Philadelphia Phillies begin a devastating four-game sweep of their closest pursuers, the Chicago Cubs, with a 10–3 trouncing of the home side. Steve Carlton (17–6) defeats Rick Reuschel (15–5); the Hall-of-Fame southpaw smashes a home run, and battery-mate Tim McCarver clouts two, to help Carlton's cause. By the time the Phillies leave town after an August 14 doubleheader, they've pushed the Cubs all the way to third place in the National League East.
  - In a game against the New York Mets, the Pittsburgh Pirates' Ed Ott slides hard into the Mets' Felix Millan at second base attempting to break up a double play. Millan responds by punching Ott in the jaw with a baseball in his hand, after which Ott lifts up Millan and body-slams him into his extended knee and severely injures Millan's shoulder. Millan misses the remainder of the season and is forced to retire from baseball.
- August 16 – The streaky Boston Red Sox, known for shaky pitching and home-run power, win their 16th game in their last 17 contests, 5–3 at Fenway Park over the Kansas City Royals. The hot streak, which began July 28, has featured unusually strong performances by Red Sox pitchers, who have held opponents to two runs or fewer in ten of the 17 games. At 70–44, Boston now leads the American League East by 3½ games over the Baltimore Orioles, with the New York Yankees only 4½ back.
- August 17:
  - With a 5–3 road victory over the Cleveland Indians, the Royals embark on a torrid streak of their own. They will win 31 of their next 35 games, and rocket from fourth place in the American League West (64–51) to a 10½-game lead (99–55) by September 25, with a division championship clinched along the way.
  - Records fall as the Mexican League concludes its season. Ironman reliever Aurelio López of the Mexico City Reds racks up his 30th save to go with a record 19 victories in relief. Veteran Tampico first baseman Héctor Espino hits 14 home runs, raising his career total to 435, a new minor league record. Thirty-eight-year-old Vic Davalillo, the league's top hitter with a .384 batting average, is purchased by the Los Angeles Dodgers.
- August 18 – Amateur free-agent left-hander Kevin Hickey signs a Chicago White Sox contract after being invited to attend an open tryout by a White Sox employee who saw Hickey pitch in a local recreational softball league. He is the only one of 250 men at the camp to leave with a contract. Hickey will appear in 231 MLB games between 1981 and 1991.
- August 20 – The Kansas City Royals defeat the Boston Red Sox 5–2. Coupled with losses by the Chicago White Sox, Texas Rangers and Minnesota Twins, the Royals gain sole possession of first place in the American League West for the first time in 1977, and don't relinquish it for the rest of the season. The Red Sox, meanwhile, have fallen into another losing funk, with their 2–9 stretch between August 17 and 26 costing them the American League East lead.
- August 21 – In front of 46,265 fans at Shea Stadium, Tom Seaver takes the mound against the New York Mets for the first time in his career. His Cincinnati Reds defeat the Mets 5–1.
- August 23:
  - The reeling Boston Red Sox are one-hit by the Minnesota Twins' Dave Goltz at Metropolitan Stadium. Jim Rice's fourth-inning single is the Red Sox's only safety. The defeat is Boston's fifth straight.
  - The New York Yankees defeat the Chicago White Sox 8–3 at Comiskey Park. Coupled with the Red Sox' loss to the Twins, the Yankees move into first place for the first time since July 9. Moreover, Billy Martin's Bombers (now 73–51) are in the midst of a month-long 28–5 torrid stretch and will remain atop the American League East for the remainder of the season.
- August 27 – Against the New York Yankees, the Texas Rangers' Toby Harrah and Bump Wills become the first players in Major League history to hit back-to-back inside-the-park home runs.
- August 28 – The Padres place Dave Kingman on waivers.
- August 29:
  - St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Lou Brock steals two bases in a 4–3 loss to the San Diego Padres. It is the 893rd career stolen base for Brock, breaking Ty Cobb's modern record.
  - Duane Kuiper hits his first and only career home run. He currently holds the live-ball era record for the most career at-bats with exactly one home run.
- August 31:
  - Hank Aaron's major league mark of 755 career home runs is tied by Sadaharu Oh in Japan. Three days later, Oh will hit his 756th homer to surpass Aaron's total, becoming the most prolific home run hitter in professional baseball history.
  - Still harboring playoff hopes, the Chicago White Sox reacquire veteran reliever Clay Carroll from the St. Louis Cardinals for three "players to be named later:" pitchers Dave Hamilton and Silvio Martínez and outfielder Nyls Nyman. The ChiSox had sent Carroll to St. Louis in March 1977, and he enjoyed a good season coming out of the Redbird bullpen. However, he's treated rudely by American League hitters, winning but one game and saving another in eight September appearances.
  - The Los Angeles Dodgers acquire veteran catcher Jerry Grote from the New York Mets for two minor-league players to named later. To make room for Grote, they release first baseman/pinch-hitter Boog Powell.

### September
