---
title: "RFC 9114: HTTP/3 (part 2/4)"
source: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9114.html
domain: http3-protocol
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: http/3, http3, http over quic
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/4
---

## 5. Connection Closure

Once established, an HTTP/3 connection can be used for many requests and responses over time until the connection is closed. Connection closure can happen in any of several different ways.¶

### 5.1. Idle Connections

Each QUIC endpoint declares an idle timeout during the handshake. If the QUIC connection remains idle (no packets received) for longer than this duration, the peer will assume that the connection has been closed. HTTP/3 implementations will need to open a new HTTP/3 connection for new requests if the existing connection has been idle for longer than the idle timeout negotiated during the QUIC handshake, and they SHOULD do so if approaching the idle timeout; see Section 10.1 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT].¶

HTTP clients are expected to request that the transport keep connections open while there are responses outstanding for requests or server pushes, as described in Section 10.1.2 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT]. If the client is not expecting a response from the server, allowing an idle connection to time out is preferred over expending effort maintaining a connection that might not be needed. A gateway MAY maintain connections in anticipation of need rather than incur the latency cost of connection establishment to servers. Servers SHOULD NOT actively keep connections open.¶

### 5.2. Connection Shutdown

Even when a connection is not idle, either endpoint can decide to stop using the connection and initiate a graceful connection close. Endpoints initiate the graceful shutdown of an HTTP/3 connection by sending a GOAWAY frame. The GOAWAY frame contains an identifier that indicates to the receiver the range of requests or pushes that were or might be processed in this connection. The server sends a client-initiated bidirectional stream ID; the client sends a push ID. Requests or pushes with the indicated identifier or greater are rejected (Section 4.1.1) by the sender of the GOAWAY. This identifier MAY be zero if no requests or pushes were processed.¶

The information in the GOAWAY frame enables a client and server to agree on which requests or pushes were accepted prior to the shutdown of the HTTP/3 connection. Upon sending a GOAWAY frame, the endpoint SHOULD explicitly cancel (see Sections 4.1.1 and 7.2.3) any requests or pushes that have identifiers greater than or equal to the one indicated, in order to clean up transport state for the affected streams. The endpoint SHOULD continue to do so as more requests or pushes arrive.¶

Endpoints MUST NOT initiate new requests or promise new pushes on the connection after receipt of a GOAWAY frame from the peer. Clients MAY establish a new connection to send additional requests.¶

Some requests or pushes might already be in transit:¶

- Upon receipt of a GOAWAY frame, if the client has already sent requests with a stream ID greater than or equal to the identifier contained in the GOAWAY frame, those requests will not be processed. Clients can safely retry unprocessed requests on a different HTTP connection. A client that is unable to retry requests loses all requests that are in flight when the server closes the connection.¶ Requests on stream IDs less than the stream ID in a GOAWAY frame from the server might have been processed; their status cannot be known until a response is received, the stream is reset individually, another GOAWAY is received with a lower stream ID than that of the request in question, or the connection terminates.¶ Servers MAY reject individual requests on streams below the indicated ID if these requests were not processed.¶
- If a server receives a GOAWAY frame after having promised pushes with a push ID greater than or equal to the identifier contained in the GOAWAY frame, those pushes will not be accepted.¶

Servers SHOULD send a GOAWAY frame when the closing of a connection is known in advance, even if the advance notice is small, so that the remote peer can know whether or not a request has been partially processed. For example, if an HTTP client sends a POST at the same time that a server closes a QUIC connection, the client cannot know if the server started to process that POST request if the server does not send a GOAWAY frame to indicate what streams it might have acted on.¶

An endpoint MAY send multiple GOAWAY frames indicating different identifiers, but the identifier in each frame MUST NOT be greater than the identifier in any previous frame, since clients might already have retried unprocessed requests on another HTTP connection. Receiving a GOAWAY containing a larger identifier than previously received MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

An endpoint that is attempting to gracefully shut down a connection can send a GOAWAY frame with a value set to the maximum possible value (262-4 for servers, 262-1 for clients). This ensures that the peer stops creating new requests or pushes. After allowing time for any in-flight requests or pushes to arrive, the endpoint can send another GOAWAY frame indicating which requests or pushes it might accept before the end of the connection. This ensures that a connection can be cleanly shut down without losing requests.¶

A client has more flexibility in the value it chooses for the Push ID field in a GOAWAY that it sends. A value of 262-1 indicates that the server can continue fulfilling pushes that have already been promised. A smaller value indicates the client will reject pushes with push IDs greater than or equal to this value. Like the server, the client MAY send subsequent GOAWAY frames so long as the specified push ID is no greater than any previously sent value.¶

Even when a GOAWAY indicates that a given request or push will not be processed or accepted upon receipt, the underlying transport resources still exist. The endpoint that initiated these requests can cancel them to clean up transport state.¶

Once all accepted requests and pushes have been processed, the endpoint can permit the connection to become idle, or it MAY initiate an immediate closure of the connection. An endpoint that completes a graceful shutdown SHOULD use the H3_NO_ERROR error code when closing the connection.¶

If a client has consumed all available bidirectional stream IDs with requests, the server need not send a GOAWAY frame, since the client is unable to make further requests.¶

### 5.3. Immediate Application Closure

An HTTP/3 implementation can immediately close the QUIC connection at any time. This results in sending a QUIC CONNECTION_CLOSE frame to the peer indicating that the application layer has terminated the connection. The application error code in this frame indicates to the peer why the connection is being closed. See Section 8 for error codes that can be used when closing a connection in HTTP/3.¶

Before closing the connection, a GOAWAY frame MAY be sent to allow the client to retry some requests. Including the GOAWAY frame in the same packet as the QUIC CONNECTION_CLOSE frame improves the chances of the frame being received by clients.¶

If there are open streams that have not been explicitly closed, they are implicitly closed when the connection is closed; see Section 10.2 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT].¶

### 5.4. Transport Closure

For various reasons, the QUIC transport could indicate to the application layer that the connection has terminated. This might be due to an explicit closure by the peer, a transport-level error, or a change in network topology that interrupts connectivity.¶

If a connection terminates without a GOAWAY frame, clients MUST assume that any request that was sent, whether in whole or in part, might have been processed.¶


## 6. Stream Mapping and Usage

A QUIC stream provides reliable in-order delivery of bytes, but makes no guarantees about order of delivery with regard to bytes on other streams. In version 1 of QUIC, the stream data containing HTTP frames is carried by QUIC STREAM frames, but this framing is invisible to the HTTP framing layer. The transport layer buffers and orders received stream data, exposing a reliable byte stream to the application. Although QUIC permits out-of-order delivery within a stream, HTTP/3 does not make use of this feature.¶

QUIC streams can be either unidirectional, carrying data only from initiator to receiver, or bidirectional, carrying data in both directions. Streams can be initiated by either the client or the server. For more detail on QUIC streams, see Section 2 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT].¶

When HTTP fields and data are sent over QUIC, the QUIC layer handles most of the stream management. HTTP does not need to do any separate multiplexing when using QUIC: data sent over a QUIC stream always maps to a particular HTTP transaction or to the entire HTTP/3 connection context.¶

### 6.1. Bidirectional Streams

All client-initiated bidirectional streams are used for HTTP requests and responses. A bidirectional stream ensures that the response can be readily correlated with the request. These streams are referred to as request streams.¶

This means that the client's first request occurs on QUIC stream 0, with subsequent requests on streams 4, 8, and so on. In order to permit these streams to open, an HTTP/3 server SHOULD configure non-zero minimum values for the number of permitted streams and the initial stream flow-control window. So as to not unnecessarily limit parallelism, at least 100 request streams SHOULD be permitted at a time.¶

HTTP/3 does not use server-initiated bidirectional streams, though an extension could define a use for these streams. Clients MUST treat receipt of a server-initiated bidirectional stream as a connection error of type H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR unless such an extension has been negotiated.¶

### 6.2. Unidirectional Streams

Unidirectional streams, in either direction, are used for a range of purposes. The purpose is indicated by a stream type, which is sent as a variable-length integer at the start of the stream. The format and structure of data that follows this integer is determined by the stream type.¶

```
Unidirectional Stream Header {
  Stream Type (i),
}
```

Two stream types are defined in this document: control streams (Section 6.2.1) and push streams (Section 6.2.2). [QPACK] defines two additional stream types. Other stream types can be defined by extensions to HTTP/3; see Section 9 for more details. Some stream types are reserved (Section 6.2.3).¶

The performance of HTTP/3 connections in the early phase of their lifetime is sensitive to the creation and exchange of data on unidirectional streams. Endpoints that excessively restrict the number of streams or the flow-control window of these streams will increase the chance that the remote peer reaches the limit early and becomes blocked. In particular, implementations should consider that remote peers may wish to exercise reserved stream behavior (Section 6.2.3) with some of the unidirectional streams they are permitted to use.¶

Each endpoint needs to create at least one unidirectional stream for the HTTP control stream. QPACK requires two additional unidirectional streams, and other extensions might require further streams. Therefore, the transport parameters sent by both clients and servers MUST allow the peer to create at least three unidirectional streams. These transport parameters SHOULD also provide at least 1,024 bytes of flow-control credit to each unidirectional stream.¶

Note that an endpoint is not required to grant additional credits to create more unidirectional streams if its peer consumes all the initial credits before creating the critical unidirectional streams. Endpoints SHOULD create the HTTP control stream as well as the unidirectional streams required by mandatory extensions (such as the QPACK encoder and decoder streams) first, and then create additional streams as allowed by their peer.¶

If the stream header indicates a stream type that is not supported by the recipient, the remainder of the stream cannot be consumed as the semantics are unknown. Recipients of unknown stream types MUST either abort reading of the stream or discard incoming data without further processing. If reading is aborted, the recipient SHOULD use the H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR error code or a reserved error code (Section 8.1). The recipient MUST NOT consider unknown stream types to be a connection error of any kind.¶

As certain stream types can affect connection state, a recipient SHOULD NOT discard data from incoming unidirectional streams prior to reading the stream type.¶

Implementations MAY send stream types before knowing whether the peer supports them. However, stream types that could modify the state or semantics of existing protocol components, including QPACK or other extensions, MUST NOT be sent until the peer is known to support them.¶

A sender can close or reset a unidirectional stream unless otherwise specified. A receiver MUST tolerate unidirectional streams being closed or reset prior to the reception of the unidirectional stream header.¶

#### 6.2.1. Control Streams

A control stream is indicated by a stream type of 0x00. Data on this stream consists of HTTP/3 frames, as defined in Section 7.2.¶

Each side MUST initiate a single control stream at the beginning of the connection and send its SETTINGS frame as the first frame on this stream. If the first frame of the control stream is any other frame type, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_MISSING_SETTINGS. Only one control stream per peer is permitted; receipt of a second stream claiming to be a control stream MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR. The sender MUST NOT close the control stream, and the receiver MUST NOT request that the sender close the control stream. If either control stream is closed at any point, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_CLOSED_CRITICAL_STREAM. Connection errors are described in Section 8.¶

Because the contents of the control stream are used to manage the behavior of other streams, endpoints SHOULD provide enough flow-control credit to keep the peer's control stream from becoming blocked.¶

A pair of unidirectional streams is used rather than a single bidirectional stream. This allows either peer to send data as soon as it is able. Depending on whether 0-RTT is available on the QUIC connection, either client or server might be able to send stream data first.¶

#### 6.2.2. Push Streams

Server push is an optional feature introduced in HTTP/2 that allows a server to initiate a response before a request has been made. See Section 4.6 for more details.¶

A push stream is indicated by a stream type of 0x01, followed by the push ID of the promise that it fulfills, encoded as a variable-length integer. The remaining data on this stream consists of HTTP/3 frames, as defined in Section 7.2, and fulfills a promised server push by zero or more interim HTTP responses followed by a single final HTTP response, as defined in Section 4.1. Server push and push IDs are described in Section 4.6.¶

Only servers can push; if a server receives a client-initiated push stream, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR.¶

```
Push Stream Header {
  Stream Type (i) = 0x01,
  Push ID (i),
}
```

A client SHOULD NOT abort reading on a push stream prior to reading the push stream header, as this could lead to disagreement between client and server on which push IDs have already been consumed.¶

Each push ID MUST only be used once in a push stream header. If a client detects that a push stream header includes a push ID that was used in another push stream header, the client MUST treat this as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

#### 6.2.3. Reserved Stream Types

Stream types of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown types be ignored. These streams have no semantics, and they can be sent when application-layer padding is desired. They MAY also be sent on connections where no data is currently being transferred. Endpoints MUST NOT consider these streams to have any meaning upon receipt.¶

The payload and length of the stream are selected in any manner the sending implementation chooses. When sending a reserved stream type, the implementation MAY either terminate the stream cleanly or reset it. When resetting the stream, either the H3_NO_ERROR error code or a reserved error code (Section 8.1) SHOULD be used.¶


## 7. HTTP Framing Layer

HTTP frames are carried on QUIC streams, as described in Section 6. HTTP/3 defines three stream types: control stream, request stream, and push stream. This section describes HTTP/3 frame formats and their permitted stream types; see Table 1 for an overview. A comparison between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 frames is provided in Appendix A.2.¶

| Frame | Control Stream | Request Stream | Push Stream | Section |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| DATA | No | Yes | Yes | Section 7.2.1 |
| HEADERS | No | Yes | Yes | Section 7.2.2 |
| CANCEL_PUSH | Yes | No | No | Section 7.2.3 |
| SETTINGS | Yes (1) | No | No | Section 7.2.4 |
| PUSH_PROMISE | No | Yes | No | Section 7.2.5 |
| GOAWAY | Yes | No | No | Section 7.2.6 |
| MAX_PUSH_ID | Yes | No | No | Section 7.2.7 |
| Reserved | Yes | Yes | Yes | Section 7.2.8 |

The SETTINGS frame can only occur as the first frame of a Control stream; this is indicated in Table 1 with a (1). Specific guidance is provided in the relevant section.¶

Note that, unlike QUIC frames, HTTP/3 frames can span multiple packets.¶

### 7.1. Frame Layout

All frames have the following format:¶

```
HTTP/3 Frame Format {
  Type (i),
  Length (i),
  Frame Payload (..),
}
```

A frame includes the following fields:¶

**Type:**

A variable-length integer that identifies the frame type.¶

**Length:**

A variable-length integer that describes the length in bytes of the Frame Payload.¶

**Frame Payload:**

A payload, the semantics of which are determined by the Type field.¶

Each frame's payload MUST contain exactly the fields identified in its description. A frame payload that contains additional bytes after the identified fields or a frame payload that terminates before the end of the identified fields MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_ERROR. In particular, redundant length encodings MUST be verified to be self-consistent; see Section 10.8.¶

When a stream terminates cleanly, if the last frame on the stream was truncated, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_ERROR. Streams that terminate abruptly may be reset at any point in a frame.¶

### 7.2. Frame Definitions

#### 7.2.1. DATA

DATA frames (type=0x00) convey arbitrary, variable-length sequences of bytes associated with HTTP request or response content.¶

DATA frames MUST be associated with an HTTP request or response. If a DATA frame is received on a control stream, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

```
DATA Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x00,
  Length (i),
  Data (..),
}
```

#### 7.2.2. HEADERS

The HEADERS frame (type=0x01) is used to carry an HTTP field section that is encoded using QPACK. See [QPACK] for more details.¶

```
HEADERS Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x01,
  Length (i),
  Encoded Field Section (..),
}
```

HEADERS frames can only be sent on request streams or push streams. If a HEADERS frame is received on a control stream, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

#### 7.2.3. CANCEL_PUSH

The CANCEL_PUSH frame (type=0x03) is used to request cancellation of a server push prior to the push stream being received. The CANCEL_PUSH frame identifies a server push by push ID (see Section 4.6), encoded as a variable-length integer.¶

When a client sends a CANCEL_PUSH frame, it is indicating that it does not wish to receive the promised resource. The server SHOULD abort sending the resource, but the mechanism to do so depends on the state of the corresponding push stream. If the server has not yet created a push stream, it does not create one. If the push stream is open, the server SHOULD abruptly terminate that stream. If the push stream has already ended, the server MAY still abruptly terminate the stream or MAY take no action.¶

A server sends a CANCEL_PUSH frame to indicate that it will not be fulfilling a promise that was previously sent. The client cannot expect the corresponding promise to be fulfilled, unless it has already received and processed the promised response. Regardless of whether a push stream has been opened, a server SHOULD send a CANCEL_PUSH frame when it determines that promise will not be fulfilled. If a stream has already been opened, the server can abort sending on the stream with an error code of H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED.¶

Sending a CANCEL_PUSH frame has no direct effect on the state of existing push streams. A client SHOULD NOT send a CANCEL_PUSH frame when it has already received a corresponding push stream. A push stream could arrive after a client has sent a CANCEL_PUSH frame, because a server might not have processed the CANCEL_PUSH. The client SHOULD abort reading the stream with an error code of H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED.¶

A CANCEL_PUSH frame is sent on the control stream. Receiving a CANCEL_PUSH frame on a stream other than the control stream MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

```
CANCEL_PUSH Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x03,
  Length (i),
  Push ID (i),
}
```

The CANCEL_PUSH frame carries a push ID encoded as a variable-length integer. The Push ID field identifies the server push that is being cancelled; see Section 4.6. If a CANCEL_PUSH frame is received that references a push ID greater than currently allowed on the connection, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

If the client receives a CANCEL_PUSH frame, that frame might identify a push ID that has not yet been mentioned by a PUSH_PROMISE frame due to reordering. If a server receives a CANCEL_PUSH frame for a push ID that has not yet been mentioned by a PUSH_PROMISE frame, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

#### 7.2.4. SETTINGS

The SETTINGS frame (type=0x04) conveys configuration parameters that affect how endpoints communicate, such as preferences and constraints on peer behavior. Individually, a SETTINGS parameter can also be referred to as a "setting"; the identifier and value of each setting parameter can be referred to as a "setting identifier" and a "setting value".¶

SETTINGS frames always apply to an entire HTTP/3 connection, never a single stream. A SETTINGS frame MUST be sent as the first frame of each control stream (see Section 6.2.1) by each peer, and it MUST NOT be sent subsequently. If an endpoint receives a second SETTINGS frame on the control stream, the endpoint MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

SETTINGS frames MUST NOT be sent on any stream other than the control stream. If an endpoint receives a SETTINGS frame on a different stream, the endpoint MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

SETTINGS parameters are not negotiated; they describe characteristics of the sending peer that can be used by the receiving peer. However, a negotiation can be implied by the use of SETTINGS: each peer uses SETTINGS to advertise a set of supported values. The definition of the setting would describe how each peer combines the two sets to conclude which choice will be used. SETTINGS does not provide a mechanism to identify when the choice takes effect.¶

Different values for the same parameter can be advertised by each peer. For example, a client might be willing to consume a very large response field section, while servers are more cautious about request size.¶

The same setting identifier MUST NOT occur more than once in the SETTINGS frame. A receiver MAY treat the presence of duplicate setting identifiers as a connection error of type H3_SETTINGS_ERROR.¶

The payload of a SETTINGS frame consists of zero or more parameters. Each parameter consists of a setting identifier and a value, both encoded as QUIC variable-length integers.¶

```
Setting {
  Identifier (i),
  Value (i),
}

SETTINGS Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x04,
  Length (i),
  Setting (..) ...,
}
```

An implementation MUST ignore any parameter with an identifier it does not understand.¶

##### 7.2.4.1. Defined SETTINGS Parameters

The following settings are defined in HTTP/3:¶

**SETTINGS_MAX_FIELD_SECTION_SIZE (0x06):**

The default value is unlimited. See Section 4.2.2 for usage.¶

Setting identifiers of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown identifiers be ignored. Such settings have no defined meaning. Endpoints SHOULD include at least one such setting in their SETTINGS frame. Endpoints MUST NOT consider such settings to have any meaning upon receipt.¶

Because the setting has no defined meaning, the value of the setting can be any value the implementation selects.¶

Setting identifiers that were defined in [HTTP/2] where there is no corresponding HTTP/3 setting have also been reserved (Section 11.2.2). These reserved settings MUST NOT be sent, and their receipt MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_SETTINGS_ERROR.¶

Additional settings can be defined by extensions to HTTP/3; see Section 9 for more details.¶

##### 7.2.4.2. Initialization

An HTTP implementation MUST NOT send frames or requests that would be invalid based on its current understanding of the peer's settings.¶

All settings begin at an initial value. Each endpoint SHOULD use these initial values to send messages before the peer's SETTINGS frame has arrived, as packets carrying the settings can be lost or delayed. When the SETTINGS frame arrives, any settings are changed to their new values.¶

This removes the need to wait for the SETTINGS frame before sending messages. Endpoints MUST NOT require any data to be received from the peer prior to sending the SETTINGS frame; settings MUST be sent as soon as the transport is ready to send data.¶

For servers, the initial value of each client setting is the default value.¶

For clients using a 1-RTT QUIC connection, the initial value of each server setting is the default value. 1-RTT keys will always become available prior to the packet containing SETTINGS being processed by QUIC, even if the server sends SETTINGS immediately. Clients SHOULD NOT wait indefinitely for SETTINGS to arrive before sending requests, but they SHOULD process received datagrams in order to increase the likelihood of processing SETTINGS before sending the first request.¶

When a 0-RTT QUIC connection is being used, the initial value of each server setting is the value used in the previous session. Clients SHOULD store the settings the server provided in the HTTP/3 connection where resumption information was provided, but they MAY opt not to store settings in certain cases (e.g., if the session ticket is received before the SETTINGS frame). A client MUST comply with stored settings -- or default values if no values are stored -- when attempting 0-RTT. Once a server has provided new settings, clients MUST comply with those values.¶

A server can remember the settings that it advertised or store an integrity-protected copy of the values in the ticket and recover the information when accepting 0-RTT data. A server uses the HTTP/3 settings values in determining whether to accept 0-RTT data. If the server cannot determine that the settings remembered by a client are compatible with its current settings, it MUST NOT accept 0-RTT data. Remembered settings are compatible if a client complying with those settings would not violate the server's current settings.¶

A server MAY accept 0-RTT and subsequently provide different settings in its SETTINGS frame. If 0-RTT data is accepted by the server, its SETTINGS frame MUST NOT reduce any limits or alter any values that might be violated by the client with its 0-RTT data. The server MUST include all settings that differ from their default values. If a server accepts 0-RTT but then sends settings that are not compatible with the previously specified settings, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_SETTINGS_ERROR. If a server accepts 0-RTT but then sends a SETTINGS frame that omits a setting value that the client understands (apart from reserved setting identifiers) that was previously specified to have a non-default value, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_SETTINGS_ERROR.¶

#### 7.2.5. PUSH_PROMISE

The PUSH_PROMISE frame (type=0x05) is used to carry a promised request header section from server to client on a request stream.¶

```
PUSH_PROMISE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x05,
  Length (i),
  Push ID (i),
  Encoded Field Section (..),
}
```

The payload consists of:¶

**Push ID:**

A variable-length integer that identifies the server push operation. A push ID is used in push stream headers (Section 4.6) and CANCEL_PUSH frames.¶

**Encoded Field Section:**

QPACK-encoded request header fields for the promised response. See [QPACK] for more details.¶

A server MUST NOT use a push ID that is larger than the client has provided in a MAX_PUSH_ID frame (Section 7.2.7). A client MUST treat receipt of a PUSH_PROMISE frame that contains a larger push ID than the client has advertised as a connection error of H3_ID_ERROR.¶

A server MAY use the same push ID in multiple PUSH_PROMISE frames. If so, the decompressed request header sets MUST contain the same fields in the same order, and both the name and the value in each field MUST be exact matches. Clients SHOULD compare the request header sections for resources promised multiple times. If a client receives a push ID that has already been promised and detects a mismatch, it MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR. If the decompressed field sections match exactly, the client SHOULD associate the pushed content with each stream on which a PUSH_PROMISE frame was received.¶

Allowing duplicate references to the same push ID is primarily to reduce duplication caused by concurrent requests. A server SHOULD avoid reusing a push ID over a long period. Clients are likely to consume server push responses and not retain them for reuse over time. Clients that see a PUSH_PROMISE frame that uses a push ID that they have already consumed and discarded are forced to ignore the promise.¶

If a PUSH_PROMISE frame is received on the control stream, the client MUST respond with a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

A client MUST NOT send a PUSH_PROMISE frame. A server MUST treat the receipt of a PUSH_PROMISE frame as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

See Section 4.6 for a description of the overall server push mechanism.¶

#### 7.2.6. GOAWAY

The GOAWAY frame (type=0x07) is used to initiate graceful shutdown of an HTTP/3 connection by either endpoint. GOAWAY allows an endpoint to stop accepting new requests or pushes while still finishing processing of previously received requests and pushes. This enables administrative actions, like server maintenance. GOAWAY by itself does not close a connection.¶

```
GOAWAY Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x07,
  Length (i),
  Stream ID/Push ID (i),
}
```

The GOAWAY frame is always sent on the control stream. In the server-to-client direction, it carries a QUIC stream ID for a client-initiated bidirectional stream encoded as a variable-length integer. A client MUST treat receipt of a GOAWAY frame containing a stream ID of any other type as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

In the client-to-server direction, the GOAWAY frame carries a push ID encoded as a variable-length integer.¶

The GOAWAY frame applies to the entire connection, not a specific stream. A client MUST treat a GOAWAY frame on a stream other than the control stream as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

See Section 5.2 for more information on the use of the GOAWAY frame.¶

#### 7.2.7. MAX_PUSH_ID

The MAX_PUSH_ID frame (type=0x0d) is used by clients to control the number of server pushes that the server can initiate. This sets the maximum value for a push ID that the server can use in PUSH_PROMISE and CANCEL_PUSH frames. Consequently, this also limits the number of push streams that the server can initiate in addition to the limit maintained by the QUIC transport.¶

The MAX_PUSH_ID frame is always sent on the control stream. Receipt of a MAX_PUSH_ID frame on any other stream MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

A server MUST NOT send a MAX_PUSH_ID frame. A client MUST treat the receipt of a MAX_PUSH_ID frame as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶

The maximum push ID is unset when an HTTP/3 connection is created, meaning that a server cannot push until it receives a MAX_PUSH_ID frame. A client that wishes to manage the number of promised server pushes can increase the maximum push ID by sending MAX_PUSH_ID frames as the server fulfills or cancels server pushes.¶

```
MAX_PUSH_ID Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x0d,
  Length (i),
  Push ID (i),
}
```

The MAX_PUSH_ID frame carries a single variable-length integer that identifies the maximum value for a push ID that the server can use; see Section 4.6. A MAX_PUSH_ID frame cannot reduce the maximum push ID; receipt of a MAX_PUSH_ID frame that contains a smaller value than previously received MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.¶

#### 7.2.8. Reserved Frame Types

Frame types of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown types be ignored (Section 9). These frames have no semantics, and they MAY be sent on any stream where frames are allowed to be sent. This enables their use for application-layer padding. Endpoints MUST NOT consider these frames to have any meaning upon receipt.¶

The payload and length of the frames are selected in any manner the implementation chooses.¶

Frame types that were used in HTTP/2 where there is no corresponding HTTP/3 frame have also been reserved (Section 11.2.1). These frame types MUST NOT be sent, and their receipt MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.¶


## 8. Error Handling

When a stream cannot be completed successfully, QUIC allows the application to abruptly terminate (reset) that stream and communicate a reason; see Section 2.4 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT]. This is referred to as a "stream error". An HTTP/3 implementation can decide to close a QUIC stream and communicate the type of error. Wire encodings of error codes are defined in Section 8.1. Stream errors are distinct from HTTP status codes that indicate error conditions. Stream errors indicate that the sender did not transfer or consume the full request or response, while HTTP status codes indicate the result of a request that was successfully received.¶

If an entire connection needs to be terminated, QUIC similarly provides mechanisms to communicate a reason; see Section 5.3 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT]. This is referred to as a "connection error". Similar to stream errors, an HTTP/3 implementation can terminate a QUIC connection and communicate the reason using an error code from Section 8.1.¶

Although the reasons for closing streams and connections are called "errors", these actions do not necessarily indicate a problem with the connection or either implementation. For example, a stream can be reset if the requested resource is no longer needed.¶

An endpoint MAY choose to treat a stream error as a connection error under certain circumstances, closing the entire connection in response to a condition on a single stream. Implementations need to consider the impact on outstanding requests before making this choice.¶

Because new error codes can be defined without negotiation (see Section 9), use of an error code in an unexpected context or receipt of an unknown error code MUST be treated as equivalent to H3_NO_ERROR. However, closing a stream can have other effects regardless of the error code; for example, see Section 4.1.¶

### 8.1. HTTP/3 Error Codes

The following error codes are defined for use when abruptly terminating streams, aborting reading of streams, or immediately closing HTTP/3 connections.¶

**H3_NO_ERROR (0x0100):**

No error. This is used when the connection or stream needs to be closed, but there is no error to signal.¶

**H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR (0x0101):**

Peer violated protocol requirements in a way that does not match a more specific error code or endpoint declines to use the more specific error code.¶

**H3_INTERNAL_ERROR (0x0102):**

An internal error has occurred in the HTTP stack.¶

**H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR (0x0103):**

The endpoint detected that its peer created a stream that it will not accept.¶

**H3_CLOSED_CRITICAL_STREAM (0x0104):**

A stream required by the HTTP/3 connection was closed or reset.¶

**H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED (0x0105):**

A frame was received that was not permitted in the current state or on the current stream.¶

**H3_FRAME_ERROR (0x0106):**

A frame that fails to satisfy layout requirements or with an invalid size was received.¶

**H3_EXCESSIVE_LOAD (0x0107):**

The endpoint detected that its peer is exhibiting a behavior that might be generating excessive load.¶

**H3_ID_ERROR (0x0108):**

A stream ID or push ID was used incorrectly, such as exceeding a limit, reducing a limit, or being reused.¶

**H3_SETTINGS_ERROR (0x0109):**

An endpoint detected an error in the payload of a SETTINGS frame.¶

**H3_MISSING_SETTINGS (0x010a):**

No SETTINGS frame was received at the beginning of the control stream.¶

**H3_REQUEST_REJECTED (0x010b):**

A server rejected a request without performing any application processing.¶

**H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED (0x010c):**

The request or its response (including pushed response) is cancelled.¶

**H3_REQUEST_INCOMPLETE (0x010d):**

The client's stream terminated without containing a fully formed request.¶

**H3_MESSAGE_ERROR (0x010e):**

An HTTP message was malformed and cannot be processed.¶

**H3_CONNECT_ERROR (0x010f):**

The TCP connection established in response to a CONNECT request was reset or abnormally closed.¶

**H3_VERSION_FALLBACK (0x0110):**

The requested operation cannot be served over HTTP/3. The peer should retry over HTTP/1.1.¶

Error codes of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown error codes be treated as equivalent to H3_NO_ERROR (Section 9). Implementations SHOULD select an error code from this space with some probability when they would have sent H3_NO_ERROR.¶


## 9. Extensions to HTTP/3

HTTP/3 permits extension of the protocol. Within the limitations described in this section, protocol extensions can be used to provide additional services or alter any aspect of the protocol. Extensions are effective only within the scope of a single HTTP/3 connection.¶

This applies to the protocol elements defined in this document. This does not affect the existing options for extending HTTP, such as defining new methods, status codes, or fields.¶

Extensions are permitted to use new frame types (Section 7.2), new settings (Section 7.2.4.1), new error codes (Section 8), or new unidirectional stream types (Section 6.2). Registries are established for managing these extension points: frame types (Section 11.2.1), settings (Section 11.2.2), error codes (Section 11.2.3), and stream types (Section 11.2.4).¶

Implementations MUST ignore unknown or unsupported values in all extensible protocol elements. Implementations MUST discard data or abort reading on unidirectional streams that have unknown or unsupported types. This means that any of these extension points can be safely used by extensions without prior arrangement or negotiation. However, where a known frame type is required to be in a specific location, such as the SETTINGS frame as the first frame of the control stream (see Section 6.2.1), an unknown frame type does not satisfy that requirement and SHOULD be treated as an error.¶

Extensions that could change the semantics of existing protocol components MUST be negotiated before being used. For example, an extension that changes the layout of the HEADERS frame cannot be used until the peer has given a positive signal that this is acceptable. Coordinating when such a revised layout comes into effect could prove complex. As such, allocating new identifiers for new definitions of existing protocol elements is likely to be more effective.¶

This document does not mandate a specific method for negotiating the use of an extension, but it notes that a setting (Section 7.2.4.1) could be used for that purpose. If both peers set a value that indicates willingness to use the extension, then the extension can be used. If a setting is used for extension negotiation, the default value MUST be defined in such a fashion that the extension is disabled if the setting is omitted.¶
