---
title: "RFC 9114: HTTP/3 (part 3/4)"
source: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9114.html
domain: http3-protocol
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: http/3, http3, http over quic
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 3/4
---

## 10. Security Considerations

The security considerations of HTTP/3 should be comparable to those of HTTP/2 with TLS. However, many of the considerations from Section 10 of [HTTP/2] apply to [QUIC-TRANSPORT] and are discussed in that document.¶

### 10.1. Server Authority

HTTP/3 relies on the HTTP definition of authority. The security considerations of establishing authority are discussed in Section 17.1 of [HTTP].¶

### 10.2. Cross-Protocol Attacks

The use of ALPN in the TLS and QUIC handshakes establishes the target application protocol before application-layer bytes are processed. This ensures that endpoints have strong assurances that peers are using the same protocol.¶

This does not guarantee protection from all cross-protocol attacks. Section 21.5 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT] describes some ways in which the plaintext of QUIC packets can be used to perform request forgery against endpoints that don't use authenticated transports.¶

### 10.3. Intermediary-Encapsulation Attacks

The HTTP/3 field encoding allows the expression of names that are not valid field names in the syntax used by HTTP (Section 5.1 of [HTTP]). Requests or responses containing invalid field names MUST be treated as malformed. Therefore, an intermediary cannot translate an HTTP/3 request or response containing an invalid field name into an HTTP/1.1 message.¶

Similarly, HTTP/3 can transport field values that are not valid. While most values that can be encoded will not alter field parsing, carriage return (ASCII 0x0d), line feed (ASCII 0x0a), and the null character (ASCII 0x00) might be exploited by an attacker if they are translated verbatim. Any request or response that contains a character not permitted in a field value MUST be treated as malformed. Valid characters are defined by the "field-content" ABNF rule in Section 5.5 of [HTTP].¶

### 10.4. Cacheability of Pushed Responses

Pushed responses do not have an explicit request from the client; the request is provided by the server in the PUSH_PROMISE frame.¶

Caching responses that are pushed is possible based on the guidance provided by the origin server in the Cache-Control header field. However, this can cause issues if a single server hosts more than one tenant. For example, a server might offer multiple users each a small portion of its URI space.¶

Where multiple tenants share space on the same server, that server MUST ensure that tenants are not able to push representations of resources that they do not have authority over. Failure to enforce this would allow a tenant to provide a representation that would be served out of cache, overriding the actual representation that the authoritative tenant provides.¶

Clients are required to reject pushed responses for which an origin server is not authoritative; see Section 4.6.¶

### 10.5. Denial-of-Service Considerations

An HTTP/3 connection can demand a greater commitment of resources to operate than an HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 connection. The use of field compression and flow control depend on a commitment of resources for storing a greater amount of state. Settings for these features ensure that memory commitments for these features are strictly bounded.¶

The number of PUSH_PROMISE frames is constrained in a similar fashion. A client that accepts server push SHOULD limit the number of push IDs it issues at a time.¶

Processing capacity cannot be guarded as effectively as state capacity.¶

The ability to send undefined protocol elements that the peer is required to ignore can be abused to cause a peer to expend additional processing time. This might be done by setting multiple undefined SETTINGS parameters, unknown frame types, or unknown stream types. Note, however, that some uses are entirely legitimate, such as optional-to-understand extensions and padding to increase resistance to traffic analysis.¶

Compression of field sections also offers some opportunities to waste processing resources; see Section 7 of [QPACK] for more details on potential abuses.¶

All these features -- i.e., server push, unknown protocol elements, field compression -- have legitimate uses. These features become a burden only when they are used unnecessarily or to excess.¶

An endpoint that does not monitor such behavior exposes itself to a risk of denial-of-service attack. Implementations SHOULD track the use of these features and set limits on their use. An endpoint MAY treat activity that is suspicious as a connection error of type H3_EXCESSIVE_LOAD, but false positives will result in disrupting valid connections and requests.¶

#### 10.5.1. Limits on Field Section Size

A large field section (Section 4.1) can cause an implementation to commit a large amount of state. Header fields that are critical for routing can appear toward the end of a header section, which prevents streaming of the header section to its ultimate destination. This ordering and other reasons, such as ensuring cache correctness, mean that an endpoint likely needs to buffer the entire header section. Since there is no hard limit to the size of a field section, some endpoints could be forced to commit a large amount of available memory for header fields.¶

An endpoint can use the SETTINGS_MAX_FIELD_SECTION_SIZE (Section 4.2.2) setting to advise peers of limits that might apply on the size of field sections. This setting is only advisory, so endpoints MAY choose to send field sections that exceed this limit and risk having the request or response being treated as malformed. This setting is specific to an HTTP/3 connection, so any request or response could encounter a hop with a lower, unknown limit. An intermediary can attempt to avoid this problem by passing on values presented by different peers, but they are not obligated to do so.¶

A server that receives a larger field section than it is willing to handle can send an HTTP 431 (Request Header Fields Too Large) status code ([RFC6585]). A client can discard responses that it cannot process.¶

#### 10.5.2. CONNECT Issues

The CONNECT method can be used to create disproportionate load on a proxy, since stream creation is relatively inexpensive when compared to the creation and maintenance of a TCP connection. Therefore, a proxy that supports CONNECT might be more conservative in the number of simultaneous requests it accepts.¶

A proxy might also maintain some resources for a TCP connection beyond the closing of the stream that carries the CONNECT request, since the outgoing TCP connection remains in the TIME_WAIT state. To account for this, a proxy might delay increasing the QUIC stream limits for some time after a TCP connection terminates.¶

### 10.6. Use of Compression

Compression can allow an attacker to recover secret data when it is compressed in the same context as data under attacker control. HTTP/3 enables compression of fields (Section 4.2); the following concerns also apply to the use of HTTP compressed content-codings; see Section 8.4.1 of [HTTP].¶

There are demonstrable attacks on compression that exploit the characteristics of the web (e.g., [BREACH]). The attacker induces multiple requests containing varying plaintext, observing the length of the resulting ciphertext in each, which reveals a shorter length when a guess about the secret is correct.¶

Implementations communicating on a secure channel MUST NOT compress content that includes both confidential and attacker-controlled data unless separate compression contexts are used for each source of data. Compression MUST NOT be used if the source of data cannot be reliably determined.¶

Further considerations regarding the compression of field sections are described in [QPACK].¶

### 10.7. Padding and Traffic Analysis

Padding can be used to obscure the exact size of frame content and is provided to mitigate specific attacks within HTTP, for example, attacks where compressed content includes both attacker-controlled plaintext and secret data (e.g., [BREACH]).¶

Where HTTP/2 employs PADDING frames and Padding fields in other frames to make a connection more resistant to traffic analysis, HTTP/3 can either rely on transport-layer padding or employ the reserved frame and stream types discussed in Sections 7.2.8 and 6.2.3. These methods of padding produce different results in terms of the granularity of padding, how padding is arranged in relation to the information that is being protected, whether padding is applied in the case of packet loss, and how an implementation might control padding.¶

Reserved stream types can be used to give the appearance of sending traffic even when the connection is idle. Because HTTP traffic often occurs in bursts, apparent traffic can be used to obscure the timing or duration of such bursts, even to the point of appearing to send a constant stream of data. However, as such traffic is still flow controlled by the receiver, a failure to promptly drain such streams and provide additional flow-control credit can limit the sender's ability to send real traffic.¶

To mitigate attacks that rely on compression, disabling or limiting compression might be preferable to padding as a countermeasure.¶

Use of padding can result in less protection than might seem immediately obvious. Redundant padding could even be counterproductive. At best, padding only makes it more difficult for an attacker to infer length information by increasing the number of frames an attacker has to observe. Incorrectly implemented padding schemes can be easily defeated. In particular, randomized padding with a predictable distribution provides very little protection; similarly, padding payloads to a fixed size exposes information as payload sizes cross the fixed-sized boundary, which could be possible if an attacker can control plaintext.¶

### 10.8. Frame Parsing

Several protocol elements contain nested length elements, typically in the form of frames with an explicit length containing variable-length integers. This could pose a security risk to an incautious implementer. An implementation MUST ensure that the length of a frame exactly matches the length of the fields it contains.¶

### 10.9. Early Data

The use of 0-RTT with HTTP/3 creates an exposure to replay attack. The anti-replay mitigations in [HTTP-REPLAY] MUST be applied when using HTTP/3 with 0-RTT. When applying [HTTP-REPLAY] to HTTP/3, references to the TLS layer refer to the handshake performed within QUIC, while all references to application data refer to the contents of streams.¶

### 10.10. Migration

Certain HTTP implementations use the client address for logging or access-control purposes. Since a QUIC client's address might change during a connection (and future versions might support simultaneous use of multiple addresses), such implementations will need to either actively retrieve the client's current address or addresses when they are relevant or explicitly accept that the original address might change.¶

### 10.11. Privacy Considerations

Several characteristics of HTTP/3 provide an observer an opportunity to correlate actions of a single client or server over time. These include the value of settings, the timing of reactions to stimulus, and the handling of any features that are controlled by settings.¶

As far as these create observable differences in behavior, they could be used as a basis for fingerprinting a specific client.¶

HTTP/3's preference for using a single QUIC connection allows correlation of a user's activity on a site. Reusing connections for different origins allows for correlation of activity across those origins.¶

Several features of QUIC solicit immediate responses and can be used by an endpoint to measure latency to their peer; this might have privacy implications in certain scenarios.¶


## 11. IANA Considerations

This document registers a new ALPN protocol ID (Section 11.1) and creates new registries that manage the assignment of code points in HTTP/3.¶

### 11.1. Registration of HTTP/3 Identification String

This document creates a new registration for the identification of HTTP/3 in the "TLS Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) Protocol IDs" registry established in [RFC7301].¶

The "h3" string identifies HTTP/3:¶

**Protocol:**

HTTP/3¶

**Identification Sequence:**

0x68 0x33 ("h3")¶

**Specification:**

This document¶

### 11.2. New Registries

New registries created in this document operate under the QUIC registration policy documented in Section 22.1 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT]. These registries all include the common set of fields listed in Section 22.1.1 of [QUIC-TRANSPORT]. These registries are collected under the "Hypertext Transfer Protocol version 3 (HTTP/3)" heading.¶

The initial allocations in these registries are all assigned permanent status and list a change controller of the IETF and a contact of the HTTP working group (ietf-http-wg@w3.org).¶

#### 11.2.1. Frame Types

This document establishes a registry for HTTP/3 frame type codes. The "HTTP/3 Frame Types" registry governs a 62-bit space. This registry follows the QUIC registry policy; see Section 11.2. Permanent registrations in this registry are assigned using the Specification Required policy ([RFC8126]), except for values between 0x00 and 0x3f (in hexadecimal; inclusive), which are assigned using Standards Action or IESG Approval as defined in Sections 4.9 and 4.10 of [RFC8126].¶

While this registry is separate from the "HTTP/2 Frame Type" registry defined in [HTTP/2], it is preferable that the assignments parallel each other where the code spaces overlap. If an entry is present in only one registry, every effort SHOULD be made to avoid assigning the corresponding value to an unrelated operation. Expert reviewers MAY reject unrelated registrations that would conflict with the same value in the corresponding registry.¶

In addition to common fields as described in Section 11.2, permanent registrations in this registry MUST include the following field:¶

**Frame Type:**

A name or label for the frame type.¶

Specifications of frame types MUST include a description of the frame layout and its semantics, including any parts of the frame that are conditionally present.¶

The entries in Table 2 are registered by this document.¶

| Frame Type | Value | Specification |
|---|---|---|
| DATA | 0x00 | Section 7.2.1 |
| HEADERS | 0x01 | Section 7.2.2 |
| Reserved | 0x02 | This document |
| CANCEL_PUSH | 0x03 | Section 7.2.3 |
| SETTINGS | 0x04 | Section 7.2.4 |
| PUSH_PROMISE | 0x05 | Section 7.2.5 |
| Reserved | 0x06 | This document |
| GOAWAY | 0x07 | Section 7.2.6 |
| Reserved | 0x08 | This document |
| Reserved | 0x09 | This document |
| MAX_PUSH_ID | 0x0d | Section 7.2.7 |

Each code of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` (that is, 0x21, 0x40, ..., through 0x3ffffffffffffffe) MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the listing of assigned values.¶

#### 11.2.2. Settings Parameters

This document establishes a registry for HTTP/3 settings. The "HTTP/3 Settings" registry governs a 62-bit space. This registry follows the QUIC registry policy; see Section 11.2. Permanent registrations in this registry are assigned using the Specification Required policy ([RFC8126]), except for values between 0x00 and 0x3f (in hexadecimal; inclusive), which are assigned using Standards Action or IESG Approval as defined in Sections 4.9 and 4.10 of [RFC8126].¶

While this registry is separate from the "HTTP/2 Settings" registry defined in [HTTP/2], it is preferable that the assignments parallel each other. If an entry is present in only one registry, every effort SHOULD be made to avoid assigning the corresponding value to an unrelated operation. Expert reviewers MAY reject unrelated registrations that would conflict with the same value in the corresponding registry.¶

In addition to common fields as described in Section 11.2, permanent registrations in this registry MUST include the following fields:¶

**Setting Name:**

A symbolic name for the setting. Specifying a setting name is optional.¶

**Default:**

The value of the setting unless otherwise indicated. A default SHOULD be the most restrictive possible value.¶

The entries in Table 3 are registered by this document.¶

| Setting Name | Value | Specification | Default |
|---|---|---|---|
| Reserved | 0x00 | This document | N/A |
| Reserved | 0x02 | This document | N/A |
| Reserved | 0x03 | This document | N/A |
| Reserved | 0x04 | This document | N/A |
| Reserved | 0x05 | This document | N/A |
| MAX_FIELD_SECTION_SIZE | 0x06 | Section 7.2.4.1 | Unlimited |

For formatting reasons, setting names can be abbreviated by removing the 'SETTINGS_' prefix.¶

Each code of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` (that is, 0x21, 0x40, ..., through 0x3ffffffffffffffe) MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the listing of assigned values.¶

#### 11.2.3. Error Codes

This document establishes a registry for HTTP/3 error codes. The "HTTP/3 Error Codes" registry manages a 62-bit space. This registry follows the QUIC registry policy; see Section 11.2. Permanent registrations in this registry are assigned using the Specification Required policy ([RFC8126]), except for values between 0x00 and 0x3f (in hexadecimal; inclusive), which are assigned using Standards Action or IESG Approval as defined in Sections 4.9 and 4.10 of [RFC8126].¶

Registrations for error codes are required to include a description of the error code. An expert reviewer is advised to examine new registrations for possible duplication with existing error codes. Use of existing registrations is to be encouraged, but not mandated. Use of values that are registered in the "HTTP/2 Error Code" registry is discouraged, and expert reviewers MAY reject such registrations.¶

In addition to common fields as described in Section 11.2, this registry includes two additional fields. Permanent registrations in this registry MUST include the following field:¶

**Name:**

A name for the error code.¶

**Description:**

A brief description of the error code semantics.¶

The entries in Table 4 are registered by this document. These error codes were selected from the range that operates on a Specification Required policy to avoid collisions with HTTP/2 error codes.¶

| Name | Value | Description | Specification |
|---|---|---|---|
| H3_NO_ERROR | 0x0100 | No error | Section 8.1 |
| H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR | 0x0101 | General protocol error | Section 8.1 |
| H3_INTERNAL_ERROR | 0x0102 | Internal error | Section 8.1 |
| H3_STREAM_CREATION_ERROR | 0x0103 | Stream creation error | Section 8.1 |
| H3_CLOSED_CRITICAL_STREAM | 0x0104 | Critical stream was closed | Section 8.1 |
| H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED | 0x0105 | Frame not permitted in the current state | Section 8.1 |
| H3_FRAME_ERROR | 0x0106 | Frame violated layout or size rules | Section 8.1 |
| H3_EXCESSIVE_LOAD | 0x0107 | Peer generating excessive load | Section 8.1 |
| H3_ID_ERROR | 0x0108 | An identifier was used incorrectly | Section 8.1 |
| H3_SETTINGS_ERROR | 0x0109 | SETTINGS frame contained invalid values | Section 8.1 |
| H3_MISSING_SETTINGS | 0x010a | No SETTINGS frame received | Section 8.1 |
| H3_REQUEST_REJECTED | 0x010b | Request not processed | Section 8.1 |
| H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED | 0x010c | Data no longer needed | Section 8.1 |
| H3_REQUEST_INCOMPLETE | 0x010d | Stream terminated early | Section 8.1 |
| H3_MESSAGE_ERROR | 0x010e | Malformed message | Section 8.1 |
| H3_CONNECT_ERROR | 0x010f | TCP reset or error on CONNECT request | Section 8.1 |
| H3_VERSION_FALLBACK | 0x0110 | Retry over HTTP/1.1 | Section 8.1 |

Each code of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` (that is, 0x21, 0x40, ..., through 0x3ffffffffffffffe) MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the listing of assigned values.¶

#### 11.2.4. Stream Types

This document establishes a registry for HTTP/3 unidirectional stream types. The "HTTP/3 Stream Types" registry governs a 62-bit space. This registry follows the QUIC registry policy; see Section 11.2. Permanent registrations in this registry are assigned using the Specification Required policy ([RFC8126]), except for values between 0x00 and 0x3f (in hexadecimal; inclusive), which are assigned using Standards Action or IESG Approval as defined in Sections 4.9 and 4.10 of [RFC8126].¶

In addition to common fields as described in Section 11.2, permanent registrations in this registry MUST include the following fields:¶

**Stream Type:**

A name or label for the stream type.¶

**Sender:**

Which endpoint on an HTTP/3 connection may initiate a stream of this type. Values are "Client", "Server", or "Both".¶

Specifications for permanent registrations MUST include a description of the stream type, including the layout and semantics of the stream contents.¶

The entries in Table 5 are registered by this document.¶

| Stream Type | Value | Specification | Sender |
|---|---|---|---|
| Control Stream | 0x00 | Section 6.2.1 | Both |
| Push Stream | 0x01 | Section 4.6 | Server |

Each code of the format `0x1f * N + 0x21` for non-negative integer values of `N` (that is, 0x21, 0x40, ..., through 0x3ffffffffffffffe) MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the listing of assigned values.¶


## 12. References

### 12.1. Normative References

**[ALTSVC]**

Nottingham, M.

,

McManus, P.

, and

J. Reschke

,

"HTTP Alternative Services"

,

RFC 7838

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC7838

,

April 2016

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7838

>

.

**[COOKIES]**

Barth, A.

,

"HTTP State Management Mechanism"

,

RFC 6265

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC6265

,

April 2011

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6265

>

.

**[HTTP]**

Fielding, R., Ed.

,

Nottingham, M., Ed.

, and

J. Reschke, Ed.

,

"HTTP Semantics"

,

STD 97

,

RFC 9110

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9110

,

June 2022

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9110

>

.

**[HTTP-CACHING]**

Fielding, R., Ed.

,

Nottingham, M., Ed.

, and

J. Reschke, Ed.

,

"HTTP Caching"

,

STD 98

,

RFC 9111

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9111

,

June 2022

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9111

>

.

**[HTTP-REPLAY]**

Thomson, M.

,

Nottingham, M.

, and

W. Tarreau

,

"Using Early Data in HTTP"

,

RFC 8470

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8470

,

September 2018

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8470

>

.

**[QPACK]**

Krasic, C.

,

Bishop, M.

, and

A. Frindell, Ed.

,

"QPACK: Field Compression for HTTP/3"

,

RFC 9204

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9204

,

June 2022

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9204

>

.

**[QUIC-TRANSPORT]**

Iyengar, J., Ed.

and

M. Thomson, Ed.

,

"QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport"

,

RFC 9000

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9000

,

May 2021

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000

>

.

**[RFC0793]**

Postel, J.

,

"Transmission Control Protocol"

,

STD 7

,

RFC 793

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC0793

,

September 1981

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793

>

.

**[RFC2119]**

Bradner, S.

,

"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels"

,

BCP 14

,

RFC 2119

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC2119

,

March 1997

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119

>

.

**[RFC6066]**

Eastlake 3rd, D.

,

"Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions: Extension Definitions"

,

RFC 6066

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC6066

,

January 2011

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6066

>

.

**[RFC7301]**

Friedl, S.

,

Popov, A.

,

Langley, A.

, and

E. Stephan

,

"Transport Layer Security (TLS) Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation Extension"

,

RFC 7301

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC7301

,

July 2014

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7301

>

.

**[RFC8126]**

Cotton, M.

,

Leiba, B.

, and

T. Narten

,

"Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs"

,

BCP 26

,

RFC 8126

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8126

,

June 2017

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126

>

.

**[RFC8174]**

Leiba, B.

,

"Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words"

,

BCP 14

,

RFC 8174

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8174

,

May 2017

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174

>

.

**[URI]**

Berners-Lee, T.

,

Fielding, R.

, and

L. Masinter

,

"Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax"

,

STD 66

,

RFC 3986

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC3986

,

January 2005

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986

>

.

### 12.2. Informative References

**[BREACH]**

Gluck, Y.

,

Harris, N.

, and

A. Prado

,

"BREACH: Reviving the CRIME Attack"

,

July 2013

,

<

http://breachattack.com/resources/BREACH%20-%20SSL,%20gone%20in%2030%20seconds.pdf

>

.

**[DNS-TERMS]**

Hoffman, P.

,

Sullivan, A.

, and

K. Fujiwara

,

"DNS Terminology"

,

BCP 219

,

RFC 8499

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8499

,

January 2019

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8499

>

.

**[HPACK]**

Peon, R.

and

H. Ruellan

,

"HPACK: Header Compression for HTTP/2"

,

RFC 7541

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC7541

,

May 2015

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7541

>

.

**[HTTP/1.1]**

Fielding, R., Ed.

,

Nottingham, M., Ed.

, and

J. Reschke, Ed.

,

"HTTP/1.1"

,

STD 99

,

RFC 9112

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9112

,

June 2022

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9112

>

.

**[HTTP/2]**

Thomson, M., Ed.

and

C. Benfield, Ed.

,

"HTTP/2"

,

RFC 9113

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC9113

,

June 2022

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9113

>

.

**[RFC6585]**

Nottingham, M.

and

R. Fielding

,

"Additional HTTP Status Codes"

,

RFC 6585

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC6585

,

April 2012

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6585

>

.

**[RFC8164]**

Nottingham, M.

and

M. Thomson

,

"Opportunistic Security for HTTP/2"

,

RFC 8164

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8164

,

May 2017

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8164

>

.

**[TFO]**

Cheng, Y.

,

Chu, J.

,

Radhakrishnan, S.

, and

A. Jain

,

"TCP Fast Open"

,

RFC 7413

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC7413

,

December 2014

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7413

>

.

**[TLS]**

Rescorla, E.

,

"The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3"

,

RFC 8446

,

DOI 10.17487/RFC8446

,

August 2018

,

<

https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446

>

.


## Appendix A. Considerations for Transitioning from HTTP/2

HTTP/3 is strongly informed by HTTP/2, and it bears many similarities. This section describes the approach taken to design HTTP/3, points out important differences from HTTP/2, and describes how to map HTTP/2 extensions into HTTP/3.¶

HTTP/3 begins from the premise that similarity to HTTP/2 is preferable, but not a hard requirement. HTTP/3 departs from HTTP/2 where QUIC differs from TCP, either to take advantage of QUIC features (like streams) or to accommodate important shortcomings (such as a lack of total ordering). While HTTP/3 is similar to HTTP/2 in key aspects, such as the relationship of requests and responses to streams, the details of the HTTP/3 design are substantially different from HTTP/2.¶

Some important departures are noted in this section.¶

### A.1. Streams

HTTP/3 permits use of a larger number of streams (262-1) than HTTP/2. The same considerations about exhaustion of stream identifier space apply, though the space is significantly larger such that it is likely that other limits in QUIC are reached first, such as the limit on the connection flow-control window.¶

In contrast to HTTP/2, stream concurrency in HTTP/3 is managed by QUIC. QUIC considers a stream closed when all data has been received and sent data has been acknowledged by the peer. HTTP/2 considers a stream closed when the frame containing the END_STREAM bit has been committed to the transport. As a result, the stream for an equivalent exchange could remain "active" for a longer period of time. HTTP/3 servers might choose to permit a larger number of concurrent client-initiated bidirectional streams to achieve equivalent concurrency to HTTP/2, depending on the expected usage patterns.¶

In HTTP/2, only request and response bodies (the frame payload of DATA frames) are subject to flow control. All HTTP/3 frames are sent on QUIC streams, so all frames on all streams are flow controlled in HTTP/3.¶

Due to the presence of other unidirectional stream types, HTTP/3 does not rely exclusively on the number of concurrent unidirectional streams to control the number of concurrent in-flight pushes. Instead, HTTP/3 clients use the MAX_PUSH_ID frame to control the number of pushes received from an HTTP/3 server.¶

### A.2. HTTP Frame Types

Many framing concepts from HTTP/2 can be elided on QUIC, because the transport deals with them. Because frames are already on a stream, they can omit the stream number. Because frames do not block multiplexing (QUIC's multiplexing occurs below this layer), the support for variable-maximum-length packets can be removed. Because stream termination is handled by QUIC, an END_STREAM flag is not required. This permits the removal of the Flags field from the generic frame layout.¶

Frame payloads are largely drawn from [HTTP/2]. However, QUIC includes many features (e.g., flow control) that are also present in HTTP/2. In these cases, the HTTP mapping does not re-implement them. As a result, several HTTP/2 frame types are not required in HTTP/3. Where an HTTP/2-defined frame is no longer used, the frame ID has been reserved in order to maximize portability between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 implementations. However, even frame types that appear in both mappings do not have identical semantics.¶

Many of the differences arise from the fact that HTTP/2 provides an absolute ordering between frames across all streams, while QUIC provides this guarantee on each stream only. As a result, if a frame type makes assumptions that frames from different streams will still be received in the order sent, HTTP/3 will break them.¶

Some examples of feature adaptations are described below, as well as general guidance to extension frame implementors converting an HTTP/2 extension to HTTP/3.¶

#### A.2.1. Prioritization Differences

HTTP/2 specifies priority assignments in PRIORITY frames and (optionally) in HEADERS frames. HTTP/3 does not provide a means of signaling priority.¶

Note that, while there is no explicit signaling for priority, this does not mean that prioritization is not important for achieving good performance.¶

#### A.2.2. Field Compression Differences

HPACK was designed with the assumption of in-order delivery. A sequence of encoded field sections must arrive (and be decoded) at an endpoint in the same order in which they were encoded. This ensures that the dynamic state at the two endpoints remains in sync.¶

Because this total ordering is not provided by QUIC, HTTP/3 uses a modified version of HPACK, called QPACK. QPACK uses a single unidirectional stream to make all modifications to the dynamic table, ensuring a total order of updates. All frames that contain encoded fields merely reference the table state at a given time without modifying it.¶

[QPACK] provides additional details.¶

#### A.2.3. Flow-Control Differences

HTTP/2 specifies a stream flow-control mechanism. Although all HTTP/2 frames are delivered on streams, only the DATA frame payload is subject to flow control. QUIC provides flow control for stream data and all HTTP/3 frame types defined in this document are sent on streams. Therefore, all frame headers and payload are subject to flow control.¶

#### A.2.4. Guidance for New Frame Type Definitions

Frame type definitions in HTTP/3 often use the QUIC variable-length integer encoding. In particular, stream IDs use this encoding, which allows for a larger range of possible values than the encoding used in HTTP/2. Some frames in HTTP/3 use an identifier other than a stream ID (e.g., push IDs). Redefinition of the encoding of extension frame types might be necessary if the encoding includes a stream ID.¶

Because the Flags field is not present in generic HTTP/3 frames, those frames that depend on the presence of flags need to allocate space for flags as part of their frame payload.¶

Other than these issues, frame type HTTP/2 extensions are typically portable to QUIC simply by replacing stream 0 in HTTP/2 with a control stream in HTTP/3. HTTP/3 extensions will not assume ordering, but would not be harmed by ordering, and are expected to be portable to HTTP/2.¶

#### A.2.5. Comparison of HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 Frame Types

**DATA (0x00):**

Padding is not defined in HTTP/3 frames. See Section 7.2.1.¶

**HEADERS (0x01):**

The PRIORITY region of HEADERS is not defined in HTTP/3 frames. Padding is not defined in HTTP/3 frames. See Section 7.2.2.¶

**PRIORITY (0x02):**

As described in Appendix A.2.1, HTTP/3 does not provide a means of signaling priority.¶

**RST_STREAM (0x03):**

RST_STREAM frames do not exist in HTTP/3, since QUIC provides stream lifecycle management. The same code point is used for the CANCEL_PUSH frame (Section 7.2.3).¶

**SETTINGS (0x04):**

SETTINGS frames are sent only at the beginning of the connection. See Section 7.2.4 and Appendix A.3.¶

**PUSH_PROMISE (0x05):**

The PUSH_PROMISE frame does not reference a stream; instead, the push stream references the PUSH_PROMISE frame using a push ID. See Section 7.2.5.¶

**PING (0x06):**

PING frames do not exist in HTTP/3, as QUIC provides equivalent functionality.¶

**GOAWAY (0x07):**

GOAWAY does not contain an error code. In the client-to-server direction, it carries a push ID instead of a server-initiated stream ID. See Section 7.2.6.¶

**WINDOW_UPDATE (0x08):**

WINDOW_UPDATE frames do not exist in HTTP/3, since QUIC provides flow control.¶

**CONTINUATION (0x09):**

CONTINUATION frames do not exist in HTTP/3; instead, larger HEADERS/PUSH_PROMISE frames than HTTP/2 are permitted.¶

Frame types defined by extensions to HTTP/2 need to be separately registered for HTTP/3 if still applicable. The IDs of frames defined in [HTTP/2] have been reserved for simplicity. Note that the frame type space in HTTP/3 is substantially larger (62 bits versus 8 bits), so many HTTP/3 frame types have no equivalent HTTP/2 code points. See Section 11.2.1.¶

### A.3. HTTP/2 SETTINGS Parameters

An important difference from HTTP/2 is that settings are sent once, as the first frame of the control stream, and thereafter cannot change. This eliminates many corner cases around synchronization of changes.¶

Some transport-level options that HTTP/2 specifies via the SETTINGS frame are superseded by QUIC transport parameters in HTTP/3. The HTTP-level setting that is retained in HTTP/3 has the same value as in HTTP/2. The superseded settings are reserved, and their receipt is an error. See Section 7.2.4.1 for discussion of both the retained and reserved values.¶

Below is a listing of how each HTTP/2 SETTINGS parameter is mapped:¶

**SETTINGS_HEADER_TABLE_SIZE (0x01):**

See [QPACK].¶

**SETTINGS_ENABLE_PUSH (0x02):**

This is removed in favor of the MAX_PUSH_ID frame, which provides a more granular control over server push. Specifying a setting with the identifier 0x02 (corresponding to the SETTINGS_ENABLE_PUSH parameter) in the HTTP/3 SETTINGS frame is an error.¶

**SETTINGS_MAX_CONCURRENT_STREAMS (0x03):**

QUIC controls the largest open stream ID as part of its flow-control logic. Specifying a setting with the identifier 0x03 (corresponding to the SETTINGS_MAX_CONCURRENT_STREAMS parameter) in the HTTP/3 SETTINGS frame is an error.¶

**SETTINGS_INITIAL_WINDOW_SIZE (0x04):**

QUIC requires both stream and connection flow-control window sizes to be specified in the initial transport handshake. Specifying a setting with the identifier 0x04 (corresponding to the SETTINGS_INITIAL_WINDOW_SIZE parameter) in the HTTP/3 SETTINGS frame is an error.¶

**SETTINGS_MAX_FRAME_SIZE (0x05):**

This setting has no equivalent in HTTP/3. Specifying a setting with the identifier 0x05 (corresponding to the SETTINGS_MAX_FRAME_SIZE parameter) in the HTTP/3 SETTINGS frame is an error.¶

**SETTINGS_MAX_HEADER_LIST_SIZE (0x06):**

This setting identifier has been renamed SETTINGS_MAX_FIELD_SECTION_SIZE.¶

In HTTP/3, setting values are variable-length integers (6, 14, 30, or 62 bits long) rather than fixed-length 32-bit fields as in HTTP/2. This will often produce a shorter encoding, but can produce a longer encoding for settings that use the full 32-bit space. Settings ported from HTTP/2 might choose to redefine their value to limit it to 30 bits for more efficient encoding or to make use of the 62-bit space if more than 30 bits are required.¶

Settings need to be defined separately for HTTP/2 and HTTP/3. The IDs of settings defined in [HTTP/2] have been reserved for simplicity. Note that the settings identifier space in HTTP/3 is substantially larger (62 bits versus 16 bits), so many HTTP/3 settings have no equivalent HTTP/2 code point. See Section 11.2.2.¶

As QUIC streams might arrive out of order, endpoints are advised not to wait for the peers' settings to arrive before responding to other streams. See Section 7.2.4.2.¶

### A.4. HTTP/2 Error Codes

QUIC has the same concepts of "stream" and "connection" errors that HTTP/2 provides. However, the differences between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 mean that error codes are not directly portable between versions.¶

The HTTP/2 error codes defined in Section 7 of [HTTP/2] logically map to the HTTP/3 error codes as follows:¶

**NO_ERROR (0x00):**

H3_NO_ERROR in Section 8.1.¶

**PROTOCOL_ERROR (0x01):**

This is mapped to H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR except in cases where more specific error codes have been defined. Such cases include H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED, H3_MESSAGE_ERROR, and H3_CLOSED_CRITICAL_STREAM defined in Section 8.1.¶

**INTERNAL_ERROR (0x02):**

H3_INTERNAL_ERROR in Section 8.1.¶

**FLOW_CONTROL_ERROR (0x03):**

Not applicable, since QUIC handles flow control.¶

**SETTINGS_TIMEOUT (0x04):**

Not applicable, since no acknowledgment of SETTINGS is defined.¶

**STREAM_CLOSED (0x05):**

Not applicable, since QUIC handles stream management.¶

**FRAME_SIZE_ERROR (0x06):**

H3_FRAME_ERROR error code defined in Section 8.1.¶

**REFUSED_STREAM (0x07):**

H3_REQUEST_REJECTED (in Section 8.1) is used to indicate that a request was not processed. Otherwise, not applicable because QUIC handles stream management.¶

**CANCEL (0x08):**

H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED in Section 8.1.¶

**COMPRESSION_ERROR (0x09):**

Multiple error codes are defined in [QPACK].¶

**CONNECT_ERROR (0x0a):**

H3_CONNECT_ERROR in Section 8.1.¶

**ENHANCE_YOUR_CALM (0x0b):**

H3_EXCESSIVE_LOAD in Section 8.1.¶

**INADEQUATE_SECURITY (0x0c):**

Not applicable, since QUIC is assumed to provide sufficient security on all connections.¶

**HTTP_1_1_REQUIRED (0x0d):**

H3_VERSION_FALLBACK in Section 8.1.¶

Error codes need to be defined for HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 separately. See Section 11.2.3.¶

#### A.4.1. Mapping between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 Errors

An intermediary that converts between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 may encounter error conditions from either upstream. It is useful to communicate the occurrence of errors to the downstream, but error codes largely reflect connection-local problems that generally do not make sense to propagate.¶

An intermediary that encounters an error from an upstream origin can indicate this by sending an HTTP status code such as 502 (Bad Gateway), which is suitable for a broad class of errors.¶

There are some rare cases where it is beneficial to propagate the error by mapping it to the closest matching error type to the receiver. For example, an intermediary that receives an HTTP/2 stream error of type REFUSED_STREAM from the origin has a clear signal that the request was not processed and that the request is safe to retry. Propagating this error condition to the client as an HTTP/3 stream error of type H3_REQUEST_REJECTED allows the client to take the action it deems most appropriate. In the reverse direction, the intermediary might deem it beneficial to pass on client request cancellations that are indicated by terminating a stream with H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED; see Section 4.1.1.¶

Conversion between errors is described in the logical mapping. The error codes are defined in non-overlapping spaces in order to protect against accidental conversion that could result in the use of inappropriate or unknown error codes for the target version. An intermediary is permitted to promote stream errors to connection errors but they should be aware of the cost to the HTTP/3 connection for what might be a temporary or intermittent error.¶


## Acknowledgments

Robbie Shade and Mike Warres were the authors of draft-shade-quic-http2-mapping, a precursor of this document.¶

The IETF QUIC Working Group received an enormous amount of support from many people. Among others, the following people provided substantial contributions to this document:¶

- Bence Beky¶
- Daan De Meyer¶
- Martin Duke¶
- Roy Fielding¶
- Alan Frindell¶
- Alessandro Ghedini¶
- Nick Harper¶
- Ryan Hamilton¶
- Christian Huitema¶
- Subodh Iyengar¶
- Robin Marx¶
- Patrick McManus¶
- Luca Niccolini¶
- 奥 一穂 (Kazuho Oku)¶
- Lucas Pardue¶
- Roberto Peon¶
- Julian Reschke¶
- Eric Rescorla¶
- Martin Seemann¶
- Ben Schwartz¶
- Ian Swett¶
- Willy Taureau¶
- Martin Thomson¶
- Dmitri Tikhonov¶
- Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa¶

A portion of Mike Bishop's contribution was supported by Microsoft during his employment there.¶
