---
title: "Match fixing (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Match_fixing
domain: match-fixing
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: match fixing
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 2/2
---

## History

Evidence of match fixing has been found throughout recorded history, and the history of match fixing is closely related to the history of illegal gambling. The ancient Olympic Games were almost constantly dealing with allegations of athletes accepting bribes to lose a competition and city-states which often tried to manipulate the outcome with large amounts of money. These activities went on despite the oath each athlete took to protect the integrity of the events and the severe punishment sometimes inflicted on those who were caught. Chariot racing was also dogged by race fixing throughout its history.

By the end of the 19th century, gambling was illegal in most jurisdictions, but that did not stop its widespread practice. Boxing soon became rife with fighters "taking a dive", likely due to boxing being a sport involving individual competitors, which makes its matches much easier to fix without getting caught. Baseball also became plagued by match fixing despite efforts by the National League to stop gambling at its games. Matters finally came to a head in 1919 when eight members of the Chicago White Sox threw the World Series. In an effort to restore confidence, Major League Baseball established the office of the Commissioner of Baseball, and one of Kenesaw Mountain Landis's first acts was to ban all involved players for life.

MLB Rule 21 prohibits players from participating in any form of betting on baseball games, and a lifetime ban for betting on a player's own games. A poster with Rule 21 must be posted on all professional baseball clubhouses. In the 1990s, match fixing in Asia was especially common. In Malaysia, authorities suggested that 70% of football matches were being manipulated, and corruption scandals in China resulted in gamblers choosing to bet on overseas matches.

### Sumo

*Yaochō* (八百長) is a Japanese word meaning a cheating activity which is committed at places where a match, fight, game, competition, or other contest, is held, where the winner and loser are decided in advance by agreement of the competitors or related people. It is believed that the word *Yaocho* came from the name ("Chobei") of the owner of a vegetable stand (*yaoya*) during the Meiji period. Created from the first syllable of *Yaoya* and *chobei*, the word *yaocho* was created as a nickname for Chobei. Chobei had a friend called "Isenoumi Godayu" (7th Isenoumi stablemaster) with whom he played the game Igo, who had once been a sumo wrestler "Kashiwado Sogoro" (former *shikona*: "Kyonosato") and now was a "*toshiyori*" (a stablemaster of sumo). Although Chobei was a better Igo player than Isenoumi, he sometimes lost games on purpose to please Isenoumi so that Isenoumi would continue to buy merchandise from his shop. Afterward, once people knew of his cheating, they started to use *yaocho* as a word meaning any decision to win/lose a match in advance by negotiation etc. with the expectation of secondary profit, even though the match seems to be held seriously and fairly.

Economists using statistical analysis have shown very strong evidence of bout fixing in sumo wrestling. Most of the motive for match fixing is helping each other's ranking to keep their salary higher, according to Keisuke Itai. For example, wrestlers in *jūryō* (the second tier) desperately try to avoid finishing the tournament with a losing record (7–8 or worse) and exchange or buy the match result, or their salary would be nothing, 0 yen, with the participation wage of 150,000 yen every two months if they finish the tournament with a losing record, and their ranking would go down to *makushita* (third level) and only participate in seven matches, the lesser ranking from *jūryō* in which one can earn 1,036,000 yen monthly with some prizes and a full 15-match tournament.

The sumo association appears to make a distinction between *yaocho* (the payment of money to secure a result) and *koi-ni-yatta mukiryoku zumo* (the deliberate performance of underpowered sumo in which an opponent simply lays a match down without exchange of money). The intricacies of Japanese culture, which include subordination of individual gain to the greater good and knowing how to read a situation without the exchange of words (I know my opponent's score, he needs help, and I should automatically give it to him) mean that the latter is almost readily accepted in the sumo world and is also nearly impossible to prove.

### Cricket

Some of the most notorious instances of match fixing have been observed in international cricket. In 2000 the Delhi police intercepted a conversation between a blacklisted bookie and the South African cricket captain Hansie Cronje in which they learnt that Cronje accepted money to throw matches. A court of inquiry was set up and Cronje admitted to throwing matches. He was immediately banned from all cricket. He also named Saleem Malik (Pakistan), Mohammed Azharuddin and Ajay Jadeja (India) as fellow match fixers. Jadeja was banned for 4 years. Although Cronje was a kingpin of betting, following untimely death in 2002 most of his fixing partners escaped law enforcement agencies. Earlier in 1998, Australian players Mark Waugh and Shane Warne were fined for revealing information about the 'weather' to a bookmaker.

The fourth Test of Pakistan's summer 2010 cricket tour of England contained several incidents of spot fixing, involving members of Pakistan team deliberately bowling no-balls at specific points to facilitate betting through bookmakers. Following investigation, three Pakistani players were banned from cricket and sentenced to prison terms. Similarly, in Indian Premier League in 2013, S. Sreesanth and two other players were banned by the Board of Control for Cricket in India for alleged match fixing. Sreesanth's ban was briefly lifted, but the Kerala High Court upheld the ban in 2017.

In July 2017, ex-Sri Lanka cricket captain Arjuna Ranatunga alleged that the 2011 Cricket World Cup Final match between India and Sri Lanka had been fixed. The investigation was dropped by Sri Lankan authorities and the International Cricket Council in 2020 due to a lack of evidence.

In July 2022, it was reported that local authorities had shut down an operation in Gujarat, India, that had been running a fictitious, kayfabe version of the Indian Premier League in an attempt to scam Russian sports betters. The matches took place on a field with floodlights, with players dressed in replica jerseys of real IPL teams; based on bets received on a Telegram channel, umpires instructed the players and "referees" to perform specific plays and calls. Broadcasts of the "matches" were streamed on YouTube, and utilized artificial crowd noise, a sound-alike of cricket commentator Harsha Bhogle, and camera angles that never showed clear shots of the pitch, players, or deliveries. The participating players were paid 400 rupees per-game, and the operation was estimated to have scammed punters out of 300,000 rupees before it was shut down by police. The actual 2022 Indian Premier League had already concluded at the end of May.

### Association football

The issue of match fixing in association football has been described in 2013 by Chris Eaton, the former Head of Security of FIFA (the sport's world governing body), as a "crisis", while UEFA's president Michel Platini has said that if it continues, "football is dead". Zhang Jilong, president of the Asian Football Confederation, has stated that it is a "pandemic". The issue also affects a number of other sports across the world. In May 2011, world governing body FIFA announced an anti-match fixing plan, and in September 2012 FIFA President Sepp Blatter warned that match-fixing endangered "the integrity of the game". In September 2014, the Council of Europe also announced they would tackle the problem.

A number of clubs in countries across the world have been subject to match fixing, including Australia, China, and Spain. The South African national team has also been investigated. In the 18 months prior to February 2013, Europol investigated 680 matches in 30 countries. In November 2013, 11 men were charged in Estonia with fixing 17 matches. The problem is often attributed to criminal gangs based in Asia, who generate "hundreds of billions of euros per year". Players who have publicly rejected bribes have been praised, such as in a case in Belize. Sportradar Integrity Services identified 721 suspicious soccer matches in 72 countries in 2024 and 881 matches in 83 countries in 2023. Suspicious activity mostly occurred in live betting and primarily involved suspected manipulations of the winning goal margin or total goals in a march.

### Professional wrestling

In professional wrestling, most matches have predetermined results; however, as it is an open secret that professional wrestling is staged, it is not considered match fixing. Up until the 1920s, professional wrestling was considered a legitimate sport. This did not endure as professional wrestling became identified with modern theatrics or *admitted fakery*, moving away from actual competition. The "worked", known as "kayfabe" nature of wrestling led critics to deem it an illegitimate sport, particularly in comparison to boxing, amateur wrestling, and, more recently, mixed martial arts.

Many individuals began to doubt the legitimacy of wrestling after the retirement of Frank Gotch in 1913. As wrestling's popularity was diving around the same time that Major League Baseball had its own legitimacy issues, wrestling started to take on a more worked approach while still appearing as a legitimate sport, beginning with the Gold Dust Trio of the 1920s. Even after the formation of the National Wrestling Alliance in 1948, wrestling continued to have legitimacy issues.

Nevertheless, wrestling was still regulated by state athletic commissions in the United States well into the 1980s, until Vince McMahon, owner of the World Wrestling Federation, convinced the state of New Jersey in 1989 that wrestling was considered a form of entertainment (or "sports entertainment", as McMahon used) rather than as a legitimate sport, and that it should not be regulated by state athletic commissions. The move was seen as more of a relief to those who had questioned wrestling's legitimacy, since at least one major company (in this case, the WWF) was now publicly willing to admit that wrestling was staged; however, the move did anger many wrestling purists.

Due to the lingering legitimacy issues that surrounded wrestling from the 1910s until the 1980s, gambling was generally not allowed on wrestling matches while it was still considered a legitimate sport. Despite wrestling having openly acknowledged that the results are predetermined for years, since the late 2000s gambling has increased on wrestling events, though the maximum bets are kept low due to the matches being predetermined. By contrast, when the WWF co-founded an American football league with NBC known as the XFL (which played for a single season in 2001), the league had to emphasize that its games were not staged in this manner (despite drawing upon wrestling, and in particular the WWF's "Attitude Era", in its overall image and presentation), and specifically promoted the willingness of Las Vegas bookmakers to take wagers on the games as evidence of its legitimacy.

### Quiz shows

In the 1950s, the producers of several televised quiz shows in the United States were found to have engaged in match fixing, as part of an effort to boost viewer interest and ratings. Geritol, the sponsor of the new quiz show *Twenty-One*, showed concerns over the poor performance of its early contestants—which they felt were causing the show to trail behind its main competitor, *The $64,000 Question*. At the time, the majority of television programs were effectively controlled by their single sponsors, with broadcasters only providing studios and airtime. Geritol demanded that Barry & Enright Productions make changes to the show, which included the outright choreography of contestants around predetermined outcomes.

The most infamous example of this strategy came when champion Herbert Stempel was to be replaced by Charles Van Doren—a Columbia University English teacher whom the producers felt would be more popular with viewers. On *Twenty-One*, winners of matches received $500 for every point within their margin of victory, but this pot increased by $500 after every tie game. To build anticipation for the episode where Van Doren would defeat Stempel, the first episode of their match was played to three tie games; this meant that the next game would be played for $2,000 per-point. After one more tie game, Stempel threw the match to Van Doren by answering specific questions incorrectly. Among them, he incorrectly guessed that *On the Waterfront* was the winner of the Best Picture award at the 28th Academy Awards. The correct answer was *Marty*, which was also one of Stempel's favorite films.

The cancellation of the competing quiz *Dotto* under similar allegations prompted a U.S. government investigation into both it and *Twenty-One*. The investigation similarly revealed that Revlon—the sponsor of *The $64,000 Question*—had instructed the show's producers to balance its questions more favorably towards contestants they felt would be more popular among viewers (although it stopped short of outright rigging games to the same extent as *Twenty-One*). The scandal prompted the passage of a federal law prohibiting broadcasters from carrying fixed contests resembling any game of chance or intellectual skill. Notably, one quiz show, *Our Little Genius*, was cancelled before its premiere after accusations that the outcome was being scripted.

### Esports

Match fixing controversies have also emerged in Esports, including in particular *Counter-Strike: Global Offensive*, *Dota 2*, *League of Legends*, *Overwatch*, *Paladins*, and *StarCraft*. Major scandals have included those of the iBuyPower and NetcodeGuides.com *Counter-Strike* teams, where it was found that the iBuyPower team had received around $10,000 worth of items via skin gambling—the practice of wagering *CS:GO* weapon skins in a similar manner to sports betting, based on real-world market values on Steam's Community Market—after they threw matches in a major tournament. South Korean *StarCraft II* player Life was also convicted of having partaken in match fixing.

*Dota 2* matchfixing is most prominent in Chinese and SEA regions. Rustam "Adekvat" Mavliutov attributes this to a more complex structures with enough players of different skill:

> Why does it happen more often in Asia? In my opinion - where there is more structuring in the environment, where the whole cyber sports part is better structured, specific tier-divisions are identified, a huge number of tournaments and leagues are built on this structure, then the appearance of 322-matches is most possible. This structure implies the participation of bookmakers, the presence of large prize money, investors and so on. Where there is money, there will be matchfixing. Roughly speaking, if we know for sure that in China there is the first, second league and the third division, about which less is known, but some teams also play there, we understand that there will naturally be rigged matches there. We have less of this, because we have fewer leagues. We don't have a clear structure of tiers. We won't be able to put together a league with twelve tier-2 teams. You can do that in China. More teams, bigger organisations, the percentage of rigged matches is also higher, that's a fact.

### Protection against manipulation

By monitoring the pre-match betting markets it is sometimes possible to detect planned match fixing. It is also possible to detect on-going match manipulation by looking at the in-game betting markets. Several federations have employed services that provide such systems for detecting match manipulation. Prior to the 2016 MLB season, Major League Baseball (MLB) hired Genius Sports, a sports technology company specialising in integrity, to monitor the betting patterns on all of their games. In addition, Interpol monitors and publishes major developments in match-fixing and corruption in sports around the world. In addition, several federations run integrity tours where players and officials participate in educational workshops on how match fixing work and how they are prevented.
