---
title: "Group (mathematics) (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_(mathematics)
domain: group-theory
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: group theory, abstract algebra, symmetry group, abelian group
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## Finite groups

A group is called *finite* if it has a finite number of elements. The number of elements is called the order of the group. An important class is the *symmetric groups* ⁠ $\mathrm {S} _{N}$ ⁠, the groups of permutations of N objects. For example, the symmetric group on 3 letters $\mathrm {S} _{3}$ is the group of all possible reorderings of the objects. The three letters ABC can be reordered into ABC, ACB, BAC, BCA, CAB, CBA, forming in total 6 (factorial of 3) elements. The group operation is composition of these reorderings, and the identity element is the reordering operation that leaves the order unchanged. This class is fundamental insofar as any finite group can be expressed as a subgroup of a symmetric group $\mathrm {S} _{N}$ for a suitable integer ⁠ N ⁠, according to Cayley's theorem. Parallel to the group of symmetries of the square above, $\mathrm {S} _{3}$ can also be interpreted as the group of symmetries of an equilateral triangle.

The order of an element a in a group G is the least positive integer n such that ⁠ $a^{n}=e$ ⁠, where $a^{n}$ represents $\underbrace {a\cdots a} _{n{\text{ factors}}},$ that is, application of the operation "⁠ $\cdot$ ⁠" to n copies of ⁠ a ⁠. (If "⁠ $\cdot$ ⁠" represents multiplication, then $a^{n}$ corresponds to the ⁠ n ⁠th power of ⁠ a ⁠.) In infinite groups, such an n may not exist, in which case the order of a is said to be infinity. The order of an element equals the order of the cyclic subgroup generated by this element.

More sophisticated counting techniques, for example, counting cosets, yield more precise statements about finite groups: Lagrange's Theorem states that for a finite group G the order of any finite subgroup H divides the order of ⁠ G ⁠. The Sylow theorems give a partial converse.

The dihedral group $\mathrm {D} _{4}$ of symmetries of a square is a finite group of order 8. In this group, the order of $r_{1}$ is 4, as is the order of the subgroup R that this element generates. The order of the reflection elements $f_{\mathrm {v} }$ etc. is 2. Both orders divide 8, as predicted by Lagrange's theorem. The groups $\mathbb {F} _{p}^{\times }$ of multiplication modulo a prime p have order ⁠ $p-1$ ⁠.

### Finite abelian groups

Any finite abelian group is isomorphic to a product of finite cyclic groups; this statement is part of the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups.

Any group of prime order p is isomorphic to the cyclic group $\mathrm {Z} _{p}$ (a consequence of Lagrange's theorem). Any group of order $p^{2}$ is abelian, isomorphic to $\mathrm {Z} _{p^{2}}$ or ⁠ $\mathrm {Z} _{p}\times \mathrm {Z} _{p}$ ⁠. But there exist nonabelian groups of order ⁠ $p^{3}$ ⁠; the dihedral group $\mathrm {D} _{4}$ of order $2^{3}$ above is an example.

### Simple groups

When a group G has a normal subgroup N other than $\{1\}$ and G itself, questions about G can sometimes be reduced to questions about N and ⁠ $G/N$ ⁠. A nontrivial group is called *simple* if it has no such normal subgroup. Finite simple groups are to finite groups as prime numbers are to positive integers: they serve as building blocks, in a sense made precise by the Jordan–Hölder theorem.

### Classification of finite simple groups

Computer algebra systems have been used to list all groups of order up to 2000. But classifying all finite groups is a problem considered too hard to be solved.

> The axioms for a group are short and natural ... Yet somehow hidden behind these axioms is the monster simple group, a huge and extraordinary mathematical object, which appears to rely on numerous bizarre coincidences to exist. The axioms for groups give no obvious hint that anything like this exists.

—

Richard Borcherds

,

Mathematicians: An Outer View of the Inner World

The classification of all finite *simple* groups was a major achievement in contemporary group theory. There are several infinite families of such groups, as well as 26 "sporadic groups" that do not belong to any of the families. The largest sporadic group is called the monster group. The monstrous moonshine conjectures, proved by Richard Borcherds, relate the monster group to certain modular functions.

The gap between the classification of simple groups and the classification of all groups lies in the extension problem.


## Groups with additional structure

An equivalent definition of group consists of replacing the "there exist" part of the group axioms by operations whose result is the element that must exist. So, a group is a set G equipped with a binary operation $G\times G\rightarrow G$ (the group operation), a unary operation $G\rightarrow G$ (which provides the inverse) and a nullary operation, which has no operand and results in the identity element. Otherwise, the group axioms are exactly the same. This variant of the definition avoids existential quantifiers and is used in computing with groups and for computer-aided proofs.

This way of defining groups lends itself to generalizations such as the notion of group object in a category. Briefly, this is an object with morphisms that mimic the group axioms.

### Topological groups

Some topological spaces may be endowed with a group law. In order for the group law and the topology to interweave well, the group operations must be continuous functions; informally, $g\cdot h$ and $g^{-1}$ must not vary wildly if g and h vary only a little. Such groups are called *topological groups,* and they are the group objects in the category of topological spaces. The most basic examples are the group of real numbers under addition and the group of nonzero real numbers under multiplication. Similar examples can be formed from any other topological field, such as the field of complex numbers or the field of *p*-adic numbers. These examples are locally compact, so they have Haar measures and can be studied via harmonic analysis. Other locally compact topological groups include the group of points of an algebraic group over a local field or adele ring; these are basic to number theory Galois groups of infinite algebraic field extensions are equipped with the Krull topology, which plays a role in infinite Galois theory. A generalization used in algebraic geometry is the étale fundamental group.

### Lie groups

A *Lie group* is a group that also has the structure of a differentiable manifold; informally, this means that it looks locally like a Euclidean space of some fixed dimension. Again, the definition requires the additional structure, here the manifold structure, to be compatible: the multiplication and inverse maps are required to be smooth.

A standard example is the general linear group introduced above: it is an open subset of the space of all n -by- n matrices, because it is given by the inequality $\det(A)\neq 0,$ where A denotes an n -by- n matrix.

Lie groups are of fundamental importance in modern physics: Noether's theorem links continuous symmetries to conserved quantities. Rotation, as well as translations in space and time, are basic symmetries of the laws of mechanics. They can, for instance, be used to construct simple models—imposing, say, axial symmetry on a situation will typically lead to significant simplification in the equations one needs to solve to provide a physical description. Another example is the group of Lorentz transformations, which relate measurements of time and velocity of two observers in motion relative to each other. They can be deduced in a purely group-theoretical way, by expressing the transformations as a rotational symmetry of Minkowski space. The latter serves—in the absence of significant gravitation—as a model of spacetime in special relativity. The full symmetry group of Minkowski space, i.e., including translations, is known as the Poincaré group. By the above, it plays a pivotal role in special relativity and, by implication, for quantum field theories. Symmetries that vary with location are central to the modern description of physical interactions with the help of gauge theory. An important example of a gauge theory is the Standard Model, which describes three of the four known fundamental forces and classifies all known elementary particles.


## Generalizations

|   | Total | Associative | Identity | Divisible |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Partial magma | Unneeded | Unneeded | Unneeded | Unneeded |
| Semigroupoid | Unneeded | Required | Unneeded | Unneeded |
| Small category | Unneeded | Required | Required | Unneeded |
| Groupoid | Unneeded | Required | Required | Required |
| Magma | Required | Unneeded | Unneeded | Unneeded |
| Quasigroup | Required | Unneeded | Unneeded | Required |
| Unital magma | Required | Unneeded | Required | Unneeded |
| Loop | Required | Unneeded | Required | Required |
| Semigroup | Required | Required | Unneeded | Unneeded |
| Associative quasigroup | Required | Required | Unneeded | Required |
| Monoid | Required | Required | Required | Unneeded |
| Group | Required | Required | Required | Required |

More general structures may be defined by relaxing some of the axioms defining a group. The table gives a list of several structures generalizing groups.

For example, if the requirement that every element has an inverse is eliminated, the resulting algebraic structure is called a monoid. The natural numbers $\mathbb {N}$ (including zero) under addition form a monoid, as do the nonzero integers under multiplication ⁠ $(\mathbb {Z} \smallsetminus \{0\},\cdot )$ ⁠. Adjoining inverses of all elements of the monoid $(\mathbb {Z} \smallsetminus \{0\},\cdot )$ produces a group ⁠ $(\mathbb {Q} \smallsetminus \{0\},\cdot )$ ⁠, and likewise adjoining inverses to any (abelian) monoid ⁠ M ⁠ produces a group known as the Grothendieck group of ⁠ M ⁠.

A group can be thought of as a small category with one object ⁠ x ⁠ in which every morphism is an isomorphism: given such a category, the set $\operatorname {Hom} (x,x)$ is a group; conversely, given a group ⁠ G ⁠, one can build a small category with one object ⁠ x ⁠ in which ⁠ $\operatorname {Hom} (x,x)\simeq G$ ⁠. More generally, a groupoid is any small category in which every morphism is an isomorphism. In a groupoid, the set of all morphisms in the category is usually not a group, because the composition is only partially defined: ⁠ $fg$ ⁠ is defined only when the source of ⁠ f ⁠ matches the target of ⁠ g ⁠. Groupoids arise in topology (for instance, the fundamental groupoid) and in the theory of stacks.

Finally, it is possible to generalize any of these concepts by replacing the binary operation with an n-ary operation (i.e., an operation taking n arguments, for some nonnegative integer n). With the proper generalization of the group axioms, this gives a notion of n-ary group.

Examples

Set

Natural numbers

⁠

$\mathbb {N}$

⁠

Integers

⁠

$\mathbb {Z}$

⁠

Rational numbers

⁠

$\mathbb {Q}$

⁠

Real numbers

⁠

$\mathbb {R}$

⁠

Complex numbers

⁠

$\mathbb {C}$

⁠

Integers modulo 3

⁠

$\mathbb {Z} /n\mathbb {Z} =\{0,1,2\}$

⁠

Operation

+

×

+

×

+

−

×

÷

+

×

Total

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

yes

Identity

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

no

yes

yes

Inverse

no

no

yes

no

yes

no

only if

⁠

$a\neq 0$

⁠

no

yes

only if

⁠

$a\neq 0$

⁠

Divisibility

no

no

yes

no

yes

yes

only if

⁠

$a\neq 0$

⁠

only if

⁠

$a\neq 0$

⁠

yes

no

Associative

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

no

yes

yes

Commutative

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

no

yes

yes

Structure

monoid

monoid

abelian group

monoid

abelian group

quasigroup

monoid

quasigroup

(with 0 removed)

abelian group

monoid
