---
title: "os package (part 2/2)"
source: https://pkg.go.dev/os
domain: golang
license: BSD-3-Clause
tags: golang, goroutine, go module, go stdlib
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

# os package

```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	err := os.WriteFile("testdata/hello", []byte("Hello, Gophers!"), 0666)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

### Types

#### type DirEntry ¶ added in go1.16

```
type DirEntry = fs.DirEntry
```

A DirEntry is an entry read from a directory (using the ReadDir function or a File.ReadDir method).

#### func ReadDir ¶ added in go1.16

```
func ReadDir(name string) ([]DirEntry, error)
```

ReadDir reads the named directory, returning all its directory entries sorted by filename. If an error occurs reading the directory, ReadDir returns the entries it was able to read before the error, along with the error.

Example

¶

```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	files, err := os.ReadDir(".")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	for _, file := range files {
		fmt.Println(file.Name())
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

#### type File

```
type File struct {
	
}
```

File represents an open file descriptor.

The methods of File are safe for concurrent use.

#### func Create

```
func Create(name string) (*File, error)
```

Create creates or truncates the named file. If the file already exists, it is truncated. If the file does not exist, it is created with mode 0o666 (before umask). If successful, methods on the returned File can be used for I/O; the associated file descriptor has mode O_RDWR. The directory containing the file must already exist. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func CreateTemp ¶ added in go1.16

```
func CreateTemp(dir, pattern string) (*File, error)
```

CreateTemp creates a new temporary file in the directory dir, opens the file for reading and writing, and returns the resulting file. The filename is generated by taking pattern and adding a random string to the end. If pattern includes a "*", the random string replaces the last "*". The file is created with mode 0o600 (before umask). If dir is the empty string, CreateTemp uses the default directory for temporary files, as returned by TempDir. Multiple programs or goroutines calling CreateTemp simultaneously will not choose the same file. The caller can use the file's Name method to find the pathname of the file. It is the caller's responsibility to remove the file when it is no longer needed.

Example

¶

```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	f, err := os.CreateTemp("", "example")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	defer os.Remove(f.Name()) // clean up

	if _, err := f.Write([]byte("content")); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	if err := f.Close(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

Example (Suffix)

¶

```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	f, err := os.CreateTemp("", "example.*.txt")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	defer os.Remove(f.Name()) // clean up

	if _, err := f.Write([]byte("content")); err != nil {
		f.Close()
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	if err := f.Close(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

#### func NewFile

```
func NewFile(fd uintptr, name string) *File
```

NewFile returns a new File with the given file descriptor and name. The returned value will be nil if fd is not a valid file descriptor.

NewFile's behavior differs on some platforms:

- On Unix, if fd is in non-blocking mode, NewFile will attempt to return a pollable file.
- On Windows, if fd is opened for asynchronous I/O (that is, syscall.FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED has been specified in the syscall.CreateFile call), NewFile will attempt to return a pollable file by associating fd with the Go runtime I/O completion port. The I/O operations will be performed synchronously if the association fails.

Only pollable files support File.SetDeadline, File.SetReadDeadline, and File.SetWriteDeadline.

After passing it to NewFile, fd may become invalid under the same conditions described in the comments of File.Fd, and the same constraints apply.

#### func Open

```
func Open(name string) (*File, error)
```

Open opens the named file for reading. If successful, methods on the returned file can be used for reading; the associated file descriptor has mode O_RDONLY. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func OpenFile

```
func OpenFile(name string, flag int, perm FileMode) (*File, error)
```

OpenFile is the generalized open call; most users will use Open or Create instead. It opens the named file with specified flag (O_RDONLY etc.). If the file does not exist, and the O_CREATE flag is passed, it is created with mode perm (before umask); the containing directory must exist. If successful, methods on the returned File can be used for I/O. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

Example

¶

```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	f, err := os.OpenFile("notes.txt", os.O_RDWR|os.O_CREATE, 0644)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	if err := f.Close(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

Example (Append)

¶

```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	// If the file doesn't exist, create it, or append to the file
	f, err := os.OpenFile("access.log", os.O_APPEND|os.O_CREATE|os.O_WRONLY, 0644)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	if _, err := f.Write([]byte("appended some data\n")); err != nil {
		f.Close() // ignore error; Write error takes precedence
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	if err := f.Close(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

#### func OpenInRoot ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func OpenInRoot(dir, name string) (*File, error)
```

OpenInRoot opens the file name in the directory dir. It is equivalent to OpenRoot(dir) followed by opening the file in the root.

OpenInRoot returns an error if any component of the name references a location outside of dir.

See Root for details and limitations.

#### func (*File) Chdir

```
func (f *File) Chdir() error
```

Chdir changes the current working directory to the file, which must be a directory. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*File) Chmod

```
func (f *File) Chmod(mode FileMode) error
```

Chmod changes the mode of the file to mode. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*File) Chown

```
func (f *File) Chown(uid, gid int) error
```

Chown changes the numeric uid and gid of the named file. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

On Windows, it always returns the syscall.EWINDOWS error, wrapped in *PathError.

#### func (*File) Close

```
func (f *File) Close() error
```

Close closes the File, rendering it unusable for I/O. On files that support File.SetDeadline, any pending I/O operations will be canceled and return immediately with an ErrClosed error. Close will return an error if it has already been called.

#### func (*File) Fd

```
func (f *File) Fd() uintptr
```

Fd returns the system file descriptor or handle referencing the open file. If f is closed, the descriptor becomes invalid. If f is garbage collected, a finalizer may close the descriptor, making it invalid; see runtime.SetFinalizer for more information on when a finalizer might be run.

Do not close the returned descriptor; that could cause a later close of f to close an unrelated descriptor.

Fd's behavior differs on some platforms:

- On Unix and Windows, File.SetDeadline methods will stop working.
- On Windows, the file descriptor will be disassociated from the Go runtime I/O completion port if there are no concurrent I/O operations on the file.

For most uses prefer the f.SyscallConn method.

#### func (*File) Name

```
func (f *File) Name() string
```

Name returns the name of the file as presented to Open.

It is safe to call Name after [Close].

#### func (*File) Read

```
func (f *File) Read(b []byte) (n int, err error)
```

Read reads up to len(b) bytes from the File and stores them in b. It returns the number of bytes read and any error encountered. At end of file, Read returns 0, io.EOF.

#### func (*File) ReadAt

```
func (f *File) ReadAt(b []byte, off int64) (n int, err error)
```

ReadAt reads len(b) bytes from the File starting at byte offset off. It returns the number of bytes read and the error, if any. ReadAt always returns a non-nil error when n < len(b). At end of file, that error is io.EOF.

#### func (*File) ReadDir ¶ added in go1.16

```
func (f *File) ReadDir(n int) ([]DirEntry, error)
```

ReadDir reads the contents of the directory associated with the file f and returns a slice of DirEntry values in directory order. Subsequent calls on the same file will yield later DirEntry records in the directory.

If n > 0, ReadDir returns at most n DirEntry records. In this case, if ReadDir returns an empty slice, it will return an error explaining why. At the end of a directory, the error is io.EOF.

If n <= 0, ReadDir returns all the DirEntry records remaining in the directory. When it succeeds, it returns a nil error (not io.EOF).

#### func (*File) ReadFrom ¶ added in go1.15

```
func (f *File) ReadFrom(r io.Reader) (n int64, err error)
```

ReadFrom implements io.ReaderFrom.

#### func (*File) Readdir

```
func (f *File) Readdir(n int) ([]FileInfo, error)
```

Readdir reads the contents of the directory associated with file and returns a slice of up to n FileInfo values, as would be returned by Lstat, in directory order. Subsequent calls on the same file will yield further FileInfos.

If n > 0, Readdir returns at most n FileInfo structures. In this case, if Readdir returns an empty slice, it will return a non-nil error explaining why. At the end of a directory, the error is io.EOF.

If n <= 0, Readdir returns all the FileInfo from the directory in a single slice. In this case, if Readdir succeeds (reads all the way to the end of the directory), it returns the slice and a nil error. If it encounters an error before the end of the directory, Readdir returns the FileInfo read until that point and a non-nil error.

Most clients are better served by the more efficient ReadDir method.

#### func (*File) Readdirnames

```
func (f *File) Readdirnames(n int) (names []string, err error)
```

Readdirnames reads the contents of the directory associated with file and returns a slice of up to n names of files in the directory, in directory order. Subsequent calls on the same file will yield further names.

If n > 0, Readdirnames returns at most n names. In this case, if Readdirnames returns an empty slice, it will return a non-nil error explaining why. At the end of a directory, the error is io.EOF.

If n <= 0, Readdirnames returns all the names from the directory in a single slice. In this case, if Readdirnames succeeds (reads all the way to the end of the directory), it returns the slice and a nil error. If it encounters an error before the end of the directory, Readdirnames returns the names read until that point and a non-nil error.

#### func (*File) Seek

```
func (f *File) Seek(offset int64, whence int) (ret int64, err error)
```

Seek sets the offset for the next Read or Write on file to offset, interpreted according to whence: 0 means relative to the origin of the file, 1 means relative to the current offset, and 2 means relative to the end. It returns the new offset and an error, if any. The behavior of Seek on a file opened with O_APPEND is not specified.

#### func (*File) SetDeadline ¶ added in go1.10

```
func (f *File) SetDeadline(t time.Time) error
```

SetDeadline sets the read and write deadlines for a File. It is equivalent to calling both SetReadDeadline and SetWriteDeadline.

Only some kinds of files support setting a deadline. Calls to SetDeadline for files that do not support deadlines will return ErrNoDeadline. On most systems ordinary files do not support deadlines, but pipes do.

A deadline is an absolute time after which I/O operations fail with an error instead of blocking. The deadline applies to all future and pending I/O, not just the immediately following call to Read or Write. After a deadline has been exceeded, the connection can be refreshed by setting a deadline in the future.

If the deadline is exceeded a call to Read or Write or to other I/O methods will return an error that wraps ErrDeadlineExceeded. This can be tested using errors.Is(err, os.ErrDeadlineExceeded). That error implements the Timeout method, and calling the Timeout method will return true, but there are other possible errors for which the Timeout will return true even if the deadline has not been exceeded.

An idle timeout can be implemented by repeatedly extending the deadline after successful Read or Write calls.

A zero value for t means I/O operations will not time out.

#### func (*File) SetReadDeadline ¶ added in go1.10

```
func (f *File) SetReadDeadline(t time.Time) error
```

SetReadDeadline sets the deadline for future Read calls and any currently-blocked Read call. A zero value for t means Read will not time out. Not all files support setting deadlines; see SetDeadline.

#### func (*File) SetWriteDeadline ¶ added in go1.10

```
func (f *File) SetWriteDeadline(t time.Time) error
```

SetWriteDeadline sets the deadline for any future Write calls and any currently-blocked Write call. Even if Write times out, it may return n > 0, indicating that some of the data was successfully written. A zero value for t means Write will not time out. Not all files support setting deadlines; see SetDeadline.

#### func (*File) Stat

```
func (f *File) Stat() (FileInfo, error)
```

Stat returns the FileInfo structure describing file. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*File) Sync

```
func (f *File) Sync() error
```

Sync commits the current contents of the file to stable storage. Typically, this means flushing the file system's in-memory copy of recently written data to disk.

#### func (*File) SyscallConn ¶ added in go1.12

```
func (f *File) SyscallConn() (syscall.RawConn, error)
```

SyscallConn returns a raw file. This implements the syscall.Conn interface.

#### func (*File) Truncate

```
func (f *File) Truncate(size int64) error
```

Truncate changes the size of the file. It does not change the I/O offset. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*File) Write

```
func (f *File) Write(b []byte) (n int, err error)
```

Write writes len(b) bytes from b to the File. It returns the number of bytes written and an error, if any. Write returns a non-nil error when n != len(b).

#### func (*File) WriteAt

```
func (f *File) WriteAt(b []byte, off int64) (n int, err error)
```

WriteAt writes len(b) bytes to the File starting at byte offset off. It returns the number of bytes written and an error, if any. WriteAt returns a non-nil error when n != len(b).

If file was opened with the O_APPEND flag, WriteAt returns an error.

#### func (*File) WriteString

```
func (f *File) WriteString(s string) (n int, err error)
```

WriteString is like Write, but writes the contents of string s rather than a slice of bytes.

#### func (*File) WriteTo ¶ added in go1.22.0

```
func (f *File) WriteTo(w io.Writer) (n int64, err error)
```

WriteTo implements io.WriterTo.

#### type FileInfo

```
type FileInfo = fs.FileInfo
```

A FileInfo describes a file and is returned by Stat and Lstat.

#### func Lstat

```
func Lstat(name string) (FileInfo, error)
```

Lstat returns a FileInfo describing the named file. If the file is a symbolic link, the returned FileInfo describes the symbolic link. Lstat makes no attempt to follow the link. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

On Windows, if the file is a reparse point that is a surrogate for another named entity (such as a symbolic link or mounted folder), the returned FileInfo describes the reparse point, and makes no attempt to resolve it.

#### func Stat

```
func Stat(name string) (FileInfo, error)
```

Stat returns a FileInfo describing the named file. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### type FileMode

```
type FileMode = fs.FileMode
```

A FileMode represents a file's mode and permission bits. The bits have the same definition on all systems, so that information about files can be moved from one system to another portably. Not all bits apply to all systems. The only required bit is ModeDir for directories.

Example

¶

```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"io/fs"
	"log"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	fi, err := os.Lstat("some-filename")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	fmt.Printf("permissions: %#o\n", fi.Mode().Perm()) // 0o400, 0o777, etc.
	switch mode := fi.Mode(); {
	case mode.IsRegular():
		fmt.Println("regular file")
	case mode.IsDir():
		fmt.Println("directory")
	case mode&fs.ModeSymlink != 0:
		fmt.Println("symbolic link")
	case mode&fs.ModeNamedPipe != 0:
		fmt.Println("named pipe")
	}
}
```

```
Output:
```

#### type LinkError

```
type LinkError struct {
	Op  string
	Old string
	New string
	Err error
}
```

LinkError records an error during a link or symlink or rename system call and the paths that caused it.

#### func (*LinkError) Error

```
func (e *LinkError) Error() string
```

#### func (*LinkError) Unwrap ¶ added in go1.13

```
func (e *LinkError) Unwrap() error
```

#### type PathError

```
type PathError = fs.PathError
```

PathError records an error and the operation and file path that caused it.

#### type ProcAttr

```
type ProcAttr struct {
	
	
	Dir string
	
	
	
	Env []string
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	Files []*File

	
	
	
	
	Sys *syscall.SysProcAttr
}
```

ProcAttr holds the attributes that will be applied to a new process started by StartProcess.

#### type Process

```
type Process struct {
	Pid int
	
}
```

Process stores the information about a process created by StartProcess.

#### func FindProcess

```
func FindProcess(pid int) (*Process, error)
```

FindProcess looks for a running process by its pid.

The Process it returns can be used to obtain information about the underlying operating system process.

On Unix systems, FindProcess always succeeds and returns a Process for the given pid, regardless of whether the process exists. To test whether the process actually exists, see whether p.Signal(syscall.Signal(0)) reports an error.

#### func StartProcess

```
func StartProcess(name string, argv []string, attr *ProcAttr) (*Process, error)
```

StartProcess starts a new process with the program, arguments and attributes specified by name, argv and attr. The argv slice will become os.Args in the new process, so it normally starts with the program name.

If the calling goroutine has locked the operating system thread with runtime.LockOSThread and modified any inheritable OS-level thread state (for example, Linux or Plan 9 name spaces), the new process will inherit the caller's thread state.

StartProcess is a low-level interface. The os/exec package provides higher-level interfaces.

If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*Process) Kill

```
func (p *Process) Kill() error
```

Kill causes the Process to exit immediately. Kill does not wait until the Process has actually exited. This only kills the Process itself, not any other processes it may have started.

#### func (*Process) Release

```
func (p *Process) Release() error
```

Release releases any resources associated with the Process p, rendering it unusable in the future. Release only needs to be called if Process.Wait is not.

#### func (*Process) Signal

```
func (p *Process) Signal(sig Signal) error
```

Signal sends a signal to the Process. Sending Interrupt on Windows is not implemented.

#### func (*Process) Wait

```
func (p *Process) Wait() (*ProcessState, error)
```

Wait waits for the Process to exit, and then returns a ProcessState describing its status and an error, if any. Wait releases any resources associated with the Process. On most operating systems, the Process must be a child of the current process or an error will be returned.

#### func (*Process) WithHandle ¶ added in go1.26.0

```
func (p *Process) WithHandle(f func(handle uintptr)) error
```

WithHandle calls a supplied function f with a valid process handle as an argument. The handle is guaranteed to refer to process p until f returns, even if p terminates. This function cannot be used after Process.Release or Process.Wait.

If process handles are not supported or a handle is not available, it returns ErrNoHandle. Currently, process handles are supported on Linux 5.4 or later (pidfd) and Windows.

#### type ProcessState

```
type ProcessState struct {
	
}
```

ProcessState stores information about a process, as reported by Wait.

#### func (*ProcessState) ExitCode ¶ added in go1.12

```
func (p *ProcessState) ExitCode() int
```

ExitCode returns the exit code of the exited process, or -1 if the process hasn't exited or was terminated by a signal.

#### func (*ProcessState) Exited

```
func (p *ProcessState) Exited() bool
```

Exited reports whether the program has exited. On Unix systems this reports true if the program exited due to calling exit, but false if the program terminated due to a signal.

#### func (*ProcessState) Pid

```
func (p *ProcessState) Pid() int
```

Pid returns the process id of the exited process.

#### func (*ProcessState) String

```
func (p *ProcessState) String() string
```

#### func (*ProcessState) Success

```
func (p *ProcessState) Success() bool
```

Success reports whether the program exited successfully, such as with exit status 0 on Unix.

#### func (*ProcessState) Sys

```
func (p *ProcessState) Sys() any
```

Sys returns system-dependent exit information about the process. Convert it to the appropriate underlying type, such as syscall.WaitStatus on Unix, to access its contents.

#### func (*ProcessState) SysUsage

```
func (p *ProcessState) SysUsage() any
```

SysUsage returns system-dependent resource usage information about the exited process. Convert it to the appropriate underlying type, such as *syscall.Rusage on Unix, to access its contents. (On Unix, *syscall.Rusage matches struct rusage as defined in the getrusage(2) manual page.)

#### func (*ProcessState) SystemTime

```
func (p *ProcessState) SystemTime() time.Duration
```

SystemTime returns the system CPU time of the exited process and its children.

#### func (*ProcessState) UserTime

```
func (p *ProcessState) UserTime() time.Duration
```

UserTime returns the user CPU time of the exited process and its children.

#### type Root ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
type Root struct {
	
}
```

Root may be used to only access files within a single directory tree.

Methods on Root can only access files and directories beneath a root directory. If any component of a file name passed to a method of Root references a location outside the root, the method returns an error. File names may reference the directory itself (.).

Methods on Root will follow symbolic links, but symbolic links may not reference a location outside the root. Symbolic links must not be absolute.

Methods on Root do not prohibit traversal of filesystem boundaries, Linux bind mounts, /proc special files, or access to Unix device files.

Methods on Root are safe to be used from multiple goroutines simultaneously.

On most platforms, creating a Root opens a file descriptor or handle referencing the directory. If the directory is moved, methods on Root reference the original directory in its new location.

Root's behavior differs on some platforms:

- When GOOS=windows, file names may not reference Windows reserved device names such as NUL and COM1.
- On Unix, Root.Chmod, Root.Chown, and Root.Chtimes are vulnerable to a race condition. If the target of the operation is changed from a regular file to a symlink while the operation is in progress, the operation may be performed on the link rather than the link target.
- When GOOS=js, Root is vulnerable to TOCTOU (time-of-check-time-of-use) attacks in symlink validation, and cannot ensure that operations will not escape the root.
- When GOOS=plan9 or GOOS=js, Root does not track directories across renames. On these platforms, a Root references a directory name, not a file descriptor.
- WASI preview 1 (GOOS=wasip1) does not support Root.Chmod.

#### func OpenRoot ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func OpenRoot(name string) (*Root, error)
```

OpenRoot opens the named directory. It follows symbolic links in the directory name. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*Root) Chmod ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Chmod(name string, mode FileMode) error
```

Chmod changes the mode of the named file in the root to mode. See Chmod for more details.

#### func (*Root) Chown ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Chown(name string, uid, gid int) error
```

Chown changes the numeric uid and gid of the named file in the root. See Chown for more details.

#### func (*Root) Chtimes ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Chtimes(name string, atime time.Time, mtime time.Time) error
```

Chtimes changes the access and modification times of the named file in the root. See Chtimes for more details.

#### func (*Root) Close ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Close() error
```

Close closes the Root. After Close is called, methods on Root return errors.

#### func (*Root) Create ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Create(name string) (*File, error)
```

Create creates or truncates the named file in the root. See Create for more details.

#### func (*Root) FS ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) FS() fs.FS
```

FS returns a file system (an fs.FS) for the tree of files in the root.

The result implements io/fs.StatFS, io/fs.ReadFileFS, io/fs.ReadDirFS, and io/fs.ReadLinkFS.

#### func (*Root) Lchown ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Lchown(name string, uid, gid int) error
```

Lchown changes the numeric uid and gid of the named file in the root. See Lchown for more details.

#### func (*Root) Link ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Link(oldname, newname string) error
```

Link creates newname as a hard link to the oldname file. Both paths are relative to the root. See Link for more details.

If oldname is a symbolic link, Link creates new link to oldname and not its target. This behavior may differ from that of Link on some platforms.

When GOOS=js, Link returns an error if oldname is a symbolic link.

#### func (*Root) Lstat ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Lstat(name string) (FileInfo, error)
```

Lstat returns a FileInfo describing the named file in the root. If the file is a symbolic link, the returned FileInfo describes the symbolic link. See Lstat for more details.

#### func (*Root) Mkdir ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Mkdir(name string, perm FileMode) error
```

Mkdir creates a new directory in the root with the specified name and permission bits (before umask). See Mkdir for more details.

If perm contains bits other than the nine least-significant bits (0o777), Mkdir returns an error.

#### func (*Root) MkdirAll ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) MkdirAll(name string, perm FileMode) error
```

MkdirAll creates a new directory in the root, along with any necessary parents. See MkdirAll for more details.

If perm contains bits other than the nine least-significant bits (0o777), MkdirAll returns an error.

#### func (*Root) Name ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Name() string
```

Name returns the name of the directory presented to OpenRoot.

It is safe to call Name after [Close].

#### func (*Root) Open ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Open(name string) (*File, error)
```

Open opens the named file in the root for reading. See Open for more details.

#### func (*Root) OpenFile ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) OpenFile(name string, flag int, perm FileMode) (*File, error)
```

OpenFile opens the named file in the root. See OpenFile for more details.

If perm contains bits other than the nine least-significant bits (0o777), OpenFile returns an error.

#### func (*Root) OpenRoot ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) OpenRoot(name string) (*Root, error)
```

OpenRoot opens the named directory in the root. If there is an error, it will be of type *PathError.

#### func (*Root) ReadFile ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) ReadFile(name string) ([]byte, error)
```

ReadFile reads the named file in the root and returns its contents. See ReadFile for more details.

#### func (*Root) Readlink ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Readlink(name string) (string, error)
```

Readlink returns the destination of the named symbolic link in the root. See Readlink for more details.

#### func (*Root) Remove ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Remove(name string) error
```

Remove removes the named file or (empty) directory in the root. See Remove for more details.

#### func (*Root) RemoveAll ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) RemoveAll(name string) error
```

RemoveAll removes the named file or directory and any children that it contains. See RemoveAll for more details.

#### func (*Root) Rename ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Rename(oldname, newname string) error
```

Rename renames (moves) oldname to newname. Both paths are relative to the root. See Rename for more details.

#### func (*Root) Stat ¶ added in go1.24.0

```
func (r *Root) Stat(name string) (FileInfo, error)
```

Stat returns a FileInfo describing the named file in the root. See Stat for more details.

#### func (*Root) Symlink ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) Symlink(oldname, newname string) error
```

Symlink creates newname as a symbolic link to oldname. See Symlink for more details.

Symlink does not validate oldname, which may reference a location outside the root.

On Windows, a directory link is created if oldname references a directory within the root. Otherwise a file link is created.

#### func (*Root) WriteFile ¶ added in go1.25.0

```
func (r *Root) WriteFile(name string, data []byte, perm FileMode) error
```

WriteFile writes data to the named file in the root, creating it if necessary. See WriteFile for more details.

#### type Signal

```
type Signal interface {
	String() string
	Signal() 
}
```

A Signal represents an operating system signal. The usual underlying implementation is operating system-dependent: on Unix it is syscall.Signal.

```
var (
	Interrupt Signal = syscall.SIGINT
	Kill      Signal = syscall.SIGKILL
)
```

The only signal values guaranteed to be present in the os package on all systems are os.Interrupt (send the process an interrupt) and os.Kill (force the process to exit). On Windows, sending os.Interrupt to a process with os.Process.Signal is not implemented; it will return an error instead of sending a signal.

#### type SyscallError

```
type SyscallError struct {
	Syscall string
	Err     error
}
```

SyscallError records an error from a specific system call.

#### func (*SyscallError) Error

```
func (e *SyscallError) Error() string
```

#### func (*SyscallError) Timeout ¶ added in go1.10

```
func (e *SyscallError) Timeout() bool
```

Timeout reports whether this error represents a timeout.

#### func (*SyscallError) Unwrap ¶ added in go1.13

```
func (e *SyscallError) Unwrap() error
```


## Source Files

View all Source files

- dir.go
- dir_unix.go
- dirent_linux.go
- eloop_other.go
- env.go
- error.go
- error_errno.go
- exec.go
- exec_linux.go
- exec_posix.go
- exec_unix.go
- executable.go
- executable_procfs.go
- file.go
- file_open_unix.go
- file_posix.go
- file_unix.go
- getwd.go
- path.go
- path_unix.go
- pidfd_linux.go
- pipe2_unix.go
- proc.go
- rawconn.go
- removeall_at.go
- removeall_unix.go
- root.go
- root_nonwindows.go
- root_openat.go
- root_unix.go
- stat.go
- stat_linux.go
- stat_unix.go
- statat.go
- statat_unix.go
- sticky_notbsd.go
- sys.go
- sys_linux.go
- sys_unix.go
- tempfile.go
- types.go
- types_unix.go
- wait_waitid.go
- zero_copy_linux.go
- zero_copy_posix.go


## Directories

| Path | Synopsis |
|---|---|
| exec Package exec runs external commands. | Package exec runs external commands. |
| internal/fdtest Package fdtest provides test helpers for working with file descriptors across exec. | Package fdtest provides test helpers for working with file descriptors across exec. |
| signal Package signal implements access to incoming signals. | Package signal implements access to incoming signals. |
| user Package user allows user account lookups by name or id. | Package user allows user account lookups by name or id. |

Click to show internal directories.

Click to hide internal directories.
