---
title: "1064"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1064
domain: 1115
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1115
fetched: 2026-07-04
---

# 1064

Year **1064** (**MLXIV**) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

## Events

### By place

#### Europe

- Summer – King Ferdinand I (the Great) conquers more territory in modern-day Portugal and captures Coimbra. He appoints Sisnando Davides to reorganise the economy and administer the lands encircling the city.
- European warriors go to Spain, to participate in the siege of Barbastro. This expedition is sanctioned by Pope Alexander II – and is now regarded as an early form of Crusade.
- Harold Godwinson, Earl of Wessex, is shipwrecked on the shores of Ponthieu (Normandy). He is captured by Count Guy I who takes him as hostage to his castle of Beaurian.
- Duke William I (the Bastard) demands the release of Harold Godwinson from Guy I (after a ransom being paid). Harold must swear an oath to aid William to the throne of England.
- Kings Harald Hardrada of Norway and Sweyn II of Denmark agree to a peace agreement. Harald turns his attentions to England where he believes he has a right to the throne.

#### Seljuk Empire

- April 27 – Alp Arslan succeeds to the throne, as sultan of the Seljuk Empire. He becomes sole ruler of Persia from the river Oxus to the Tigris.
- The Seljuk Turks under Alp Arslan invade Anatolia, and capture Ani after a siege of 25-days. He sacks the city and slaughters its citizens.
- Badr al-Jamali, Fatimid governor of Syria, tries to engineer a pro-Fatimid coup in Aleppo; but the rebellion is suppressed by Musa Yabgu.

#### Asia

- King Bagrat IV of Georgia captures the fortress city of Samshvilde, the capital of the neighboring Tashir-Dzoraget.

#### Mesoamerica

- January 4 – The Aztecs migrate from Aztlán to the southern lands in central Mexico.

### By topic

#### Religion

- Winter – Great German Pilgrimage: Archbishop Siegfried I of Mainz leads a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Either during this pilgrimage or shortly before it, the *Ezzolied*; a High German poem on the life of Christ, is composed.
- Michaelsberg Abbey at Siegburg (modern Germany) is founded by Anno II, archbishop of Cologne.
- Construction of the Piazza dei Miracoli (known as Piazza del Duomo) at Pisa in Tuscany begins.

#### Volcanology

- Sunset Crater Volcano (modern-day Arizona) first erupts (approximate date)

## Births

- Adela of Flanders, queen of Denmark (approximate date)
- Beatrice I, countess of Bigorre (approximate date)
- Bořivoj II (or Borivoi), duke of Bohemia (approximate date)
- Danxia Zichun, Chinese Zen Buddhist monk (d. 1117)
- Hugh of Flavigny, French abbot (approximate date)
- Robert Fitz Richard, English nobleman (d. 1136)

## Deaths

- August 15 – Ibn Hazm, Andalusian historian and poet (b. 994)
- November 29 – Al-Kunduri, vizier of the Seljuk Empire (b. 1024)
- December 19 – Fujiwara no Nagaie, Japanese nobleman (b. 1005)
- Akkadevi, princess of the Chalukya dynasty (b. 1010)
- Dromtön, Tibetan monk and founder of Reting Monastery
- Dub dá Leithe (or Dubhdalethe), Irish abbot
- Gozelo I (or Gozelon), count of Montaigu
- Llywelyn Aurdorchog, Welsh nobleman (approximate date)
- Yaakov ben Yakar, German Jewish rabbi (b. 990)
- Yi Yuanji, Chinese painter (approximate date)
