---
title: "jq(1) (part 3/3)"
source: https://man.archlinux.org/man/jq.1
domain: jq-json
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: jq json, json processor, command-line json, json filter
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 3/3
---

## Generators and iterators

Some jq operators and functions are actually generators in that they can produce zero, one, or more values for each input, just as one might expect in other programming languages that have generators. For example, **.[]** generates all the values in its input (which must be an array or an object), **range(0; 10)** generates the integers between 0 and 10, and so on.

Even the comma operator is a generator, generating first the values generated by the expression to the left of the comma, then the values generated by the expression on the right of the comma.

The **empty** builtin is the generator that produces zero outputs. The **empty** builtin backtracks to the preceding generator expression.

All jq functions can be generators just by using builtin generators. It is also possible to construct new generators using only recursion and the comma operator. If recursive calls are "in tail position" then the generator will be efficient. In the example below the recursive call by **_range** to itself is in tail position. The example shows off three advanced topics: tail recursion, generator construction, and sub-functions.

```
jq ´def range(init; upto; by): def _range: if (by > 0 and . < upto) or (by < 0 and . > upto) then ., ((.+by)|_range) else empty end; if init == upto then empty elif by == 0 then init else init|_range end; range(0; 10; 3)´
   null
=> 0, 3, 6, 9
jq ´def while(cond; update): def _while: if cond then ., (update | _while) else empty end; _while; [while(.<100; .*2)]´
   1
=> [1,2,4,8,16,32,64]
```

# MATH

jq currently only has IEEE754 double-precision (64-bit) floating point number support.

Besides simple arithmetic operators such as **+**, jq also has most standard math functions from the C math library. C math functions that take a single input argument (e.g., **sin()**) are available as zero-argument jq functions. C math functions that take two input arguments (e.g., **pow()**) are available as two-argument jq functions that ignore **.**. C math functions that take three input arguments are available as three-argument jq functions that ignore **.**.

Availability of standard math functions depends on the availability of the corresponding math functions in your operating system and C math library. Unavailable math functions will be defined but will raise an error.

One-input C math functions: **acos** **acosh** **asin** **asinh** **atan** **atanh** **cbrt** **ceil** **cos** **cosh** **erf** **erfc** **exp** **exp10** **exp2** **expm1** **fabs** **floor** **gamma** **j0** **j1** **lgamma** **log** **log10** **log1p** **log2** **logb** **nearbyint** **rint** **round** **significand** **sin** **sinh** **sqrt** **tan** **tanh** **tgamma** **trunc** **y0** **y1**.

Two-input C math functions: **atan2** **copysign** **drem** **fdim** **fmax** **fmin** **fmod** **frexp** **hypot** **jn** **ldexp** **modf** **nextafter** **nexttoward** **pow** **remainder** **scalb** **scalbln** **yn**.

Three-input C math functions: **fma**.

See your system´s manual for more information on each of these.

# I/O

At this time jq has minimal support for I/O, mostly in the form of control over when inputs are read. Two builtins functions are provided for this, **input** and **inputs**, that read from the same sources (e.g., **stdin**, files named on the command-line) as jq itself. These two builtins, and jq´s own reading actions, can be interleaved with each other. They are commonly used in combination with the null input option **-n** to prevent one input from being read implicitly.

Two builtins provide minimal output capabilities, **debug**, and **stderr**. (Recall that a jq program´s output values are always output as JSON texts on **stdout**.) The **debug** builtin can have application-specific behavior, such as for executables that use the libjq C API but aren´t the jq executable itself. The **stderr** builtin outputs its input in raw mode to stderr with no additional decoration, not even a newline.

Most jq builtins are referentially transparent, and yield constant and repeatable value streams when applied to constant inputs. This is not true of I/O builtins.


## input

Outputs one new input.

Note that when using **input** it is generally necessary to invoke jq with the **-n** command-line option, otherwise the first entity will be lost.

```
echo 1 2 3 4 | jq ´[., input]´ # [1,2] [3,4]
```


## inputs

Outputs all remaining inputs, one by one.

This is primarily useful for reductions over a program´s inputs. Note that when using **inputs** it is generally necessary to invoke jq with the **-n** command-line option, otherwise the first entity will be lost.

```
echo 1 2 3 | jq -n ´reduce inputs as $i (0; . + $i)´ # 6
```


## debug, debug(msgs)

These two filters are like **.** but have as a side-effect the production of one or more messages on stderr.

The message produced by the **debug** filter has the form

```
["DEBUG:",<input-value>]
```

where **<input-value>** is a compact rendition of the input value. This format may change in the future.

The **debug(msgs)** filter is defined as **(msgs | debug | empty), .** thus allowing great flexibility in the content of the message, while also allowing multi-line debugging statements to be created.

For example, the expression:

```
1 as $x | 2 | debug("Entering function foo with $x == \($x)", .) | (.+1)
```

would produce the value 3 but with the following two lines being written to stderr:

```
["DEBUG:","Entering function foo with $x == 1"]
["DEBUG:",2]
```


## stderr

Prints its input in raw and compact mode to stderr with no additional decoration, not even a newline.


## input_filename

Returns the name of the file whose input is currently being filtered. Note that this will not work well unless jq is running in a UTF-8 locale.


## input_line_number

Returns the line number of the input currently being filtered.

# STREAMING

With the **--stream** option jq can parse input texts in a streaming fashion, allowing jq programs to start processing large JSON texts immediately rather than after the parse completes. If you have a single JSON text that is 1GB in size, streaming it will allow you to process it much more quickly.

However, streaming isn´t easy to deal with as the jq program will have **[<path>, <leaf-value>]** (and a few other forms) as inputs.

Several builtins are provided to make handling streams easier.

The examples below use the streamed form of **["a",["b"]]**, which is **[[0],"a"],[[1,0],"b"],[[1,0]],[[1]]**.

Streaming forms include **[<path>, <leaf-value>]** (to indicate any scalar value, empty array, or empty object), and **[<path>]** (to indicate the end of an array or object). Future versions of jq run with **--stream** and **--seq** may output additional forms such as **["error message"]** when an input text fails to parse.


## truncate_stream(stream_expression)

Consumes a number as input and truncates the corresponding number of path elements from the left of the outputs of the given streaming expression.

```
jq ´truncate_stream([[0],"a"],[[1,0],"b"],[[1,0]],[[1]])´
   1
=> [[0],"b"], [[0]]
```


## fromstream(stream_expression)

Outputs values corresponding to the stream expression´s outputs.

```
jq ´fromstream(1|truncate_stream([[0],"a"],[[1,0],"b"],[[1,0]],[[1]]))´
   null
=> ["b"]
```


## tostream

The **tostream** builtin outputs the streamed form of its input.

```
jq ´. as $dot|fromstream($dot|tostream)|.==$dot´
   [0,[1,{"a":1},{"b":2}]]
=> true
```

# ASSIGNMENT

Assignment works a little differently in jq than in most programming languages. jq doesn´t distinguish between references to and copies of something - two objects or arrays are either equal or not equal, without any further notion of being "the same object" or "not the same object".

If an object has two fields which are arrays, **.foo** and **.bar**, and you append something to **.foo**, then **.bar** will not get bigger, even if you´ve previously set **.bar = .foo**. If you´re used to programming in languages like Python, Java, Ruby, JavaScript, etc. then you can think of it as though jq does a full deep copy of every object before it does the assignment (for performance it doesn´t actually do that, but that´s the general idea).

This means that it´s impossible to build circular values in jq (such as an array whose first element is itself). This is quite intentional, and ensures that anything a jq program can produce can be represented in JSON.

All the assignment operators in jq have path expressions on the left-hand side (LHS). The right-hand side (RHS) provides values to set to the paths named by the LHS path expressions.

Values in jq are always immutable. Internally, assignment works by using a reduction to compute new, replacement values for **.** that have had all the desired assignments applied to **.**, then outputting the modified value. This might be made clear by this example: **{a:{b:{c:1}}} | (.a.b|=3), .**. This will output **{"a":{"b":3}}** and **{"a":{"b":{"c":1}}}** because the last sub-expression, **.**, sees the original value, not the modified value.

Most users will want to use modification assignment operators, such as **|=** or **+=**, rather than **=**.

Note that the LHS of assignment operators refers to a value in **.**. Thus **$var.foo = 1** won´t work as expected (**$var.foo** is not a valid or useful path expression in **.**); use **$var | .foo = 1** instead.

Note too that **.a,.b=0** does not set **.a** and **.b**, but **(.a,.b)=0** sets both.


## Update-assignment: |=

This is the "update" operator **|=**. It takes a filter on the right-hand side and works out the new value for the property of **.** being assigned to by running the old value through this expression. For instance, **(.foo, .bar) |= .+1** will build an object with the **foo** field set to the input´s **foo** plus 1, and the **bar** field set to the input´s **bar** plus 1.

The left-hand side can be any general path expression; see **path()**.

Note that the left-hand side of **|=** refers to a value in **.**. Thus **$var.foo |= . + 1** won´t work as expected (**$var.foo** is not a valid or useful path expression in **.**); use **$var | .foo |= . + 1** instead.

If the right-hand side outputs no values (i.e., **empty**), then the left-hand side path will be deleted, as with **del(path)**.

If the right-hand side outputs multiple values, only the first one will be used (COMPATIBILITY NOTE: in jq 1.5 and earlier releases, it used to be that only the last one was used).

```
jq ´(..|select(type=="boolean")) |= if . then 1 else 0 end´
   [true,false,[5,true,[true,[false]],false]]
=> [1,0,[5,1,[1,[0]],0]]
```


## Arithmetic update-assignment: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, //=

jq has a few operators of the form **a op= b**, which are all equivalent to **a |= . op b**. So, **+= 1** can be used to increment values, being the same as **|= . + 1**.

```
jq ´.foo += 1´
   {"foo": 42}
=> {"foo": 43}
```


## Plain assignment: =

This is the plain assignment operator. Unlike the others, the input to the right-hand side (RHS) is the same as the input to the left-hand side (LHS) rather than the value at the LHS path, and all values output by the RHS will be used (as shown below).

If the RHS of **=** produces multiple values, then for each such value jq will set the paths on the left-hand side to the value and then it will output the modified **.**. For example, **(.a,.b) = range(2)** outputs **{"a":0,"b":0}**, then **{"a":1,"b":1}**. The "update" assignment forms (see above) do not do this.

This example should show the difference between **=** and **|=**:

Provide input **{"a": {"b": 10}, "b": 20}** to the programs

```
.a = .b
```

and

```
.a |= .b
```

The former will set the **a** field of the input to the **b** field of the input, and produce the output **{"a": 20, "b": 20}**. The latter will set the **a** field of the input to the **a** field´s **b** field, producing **{"a": 10, "b": 20}**.

```
jq ´.a = .b´
   {"a": {"b": 10}, "b": 20}
=> {"a":20,"b":20}
jq ´.a |= .b´
   {"a": {"b": 10}, "b": 20}
=> {"a":10,"b":20}
jq ´(.a, .b) = range(3)´
   null
=> {"a":0,"b":0}, {"a":1,"b":1}, {"a":2,"b":2}
jq ´(.a, .b) |= range(3)´
   null
=> {"a":0,"b":0}
```


## Complex assignments

Lots more things are allowed on the left-hand side of a jq assignment than in most languages. We´ve already seen simple field accesses on the left hand side, and it´s no surprise that array accesses work just as well:

```
.posts[0].title = "JQ Manual"
```

What may come as a surprise is that the expression on the left may produce multiple results, referring to different points in the input document:

```
.posts[].comments |= . + ["this is great"]
```

That example appends the string "this is great" to the "comments" array of each post in the input (where the input is an object with a field "posts" which is an array of posts).

When jq encounters an assignment like ´a = b´, it records the "path" taken to select a part of the input document while executing a. This path is then used to find which part of the input to change while executing the assignment. Any filter may be used on the left-hand side of an equals - whichever paths it selects from the input will be where the assignment is performed.

This is a very powerful operation. Suppose we wanted to add a comment to blog posts, using the same "blog" input above. This time, we only want to comment on the posts written by "stedolan". We can find those posts using the "select" function described earlier:

```
.posts[] | select(.author == "stedolan")
```

The paths provided by this operation point to each of the posts that "stedolan" wrote, and we can comment on each of them in the same way that we did before:

```
(.posts[] | select(.author == "stedolan") | .comments) |=
    . + ["terrible."]
```

You can write comments in your jq filters using **#**.

A **#** character (not part of a string) starts a comment. All characters from **#** to the end of the line are ignored.

If the end of the line is preceded by an odd number of backslash characters, the following line is also considered part of the comment and is ignored.

For example, the following code outputs **[1,3,4,7]**

```
[
  1,
  # foo \
  2,
  # bar \\
  3,
  4, # baz \\\
  5, \
  6,
  7
  # comment \
    comment \
    comment
]
```

Backslash continuing the comment on the next line can be useful when writing the "shebang" for a jq script:

```
#!/bin/sh --
# total - Output the sum of the given arguments (or stdin)
# usage: total [numbers...]
# \
exec jq --args -MRnf -- "$0" "$@"
$ARGS.positional |
reduce (
  if . == []
    then inputs
    else .[]
  end |
  . as $dot |
  try tonumber catch false |
  if not or isnan then
    @json "total: Invalid number \($dot).\n" | halt_error(1)
  end
) as $n (0; . + $n)
```

The **exec** line is considered a comment by jq, so it is ignored. But it is not ignored by **sh**, since in **sh** a backslash at the end of the line does not continue the comment. With this trick, when the script is invoked as **total 1 2**, **/bin/sh -- /path/to/total 1 2** will be run, and **sh** will then run **exec jq --args -MRnf -- /path/to/total 1 2** replacing itself with a **jq** interpreter invoked with the specified options (**-M**, **-R**, **-n**, **--args**), that evaluates the current file (**$0**), with the arguments (**$@**) that were passed to **sh**.

# MODULES

jq has a library/module system. Modules are files whose names end in **.jq**.

Modules imported by a program are searched for in a default search path (see below). The **import** and **include** directives allow the importer to alter this path.

Paths in the search path are subject to various substitutions.

For paths starting with **~/**, the user´s home directory is substituted for **~**.

For paths starting with **$ORIGIN/**, the directory where the jq executable is located is substituted for **$ORIGIN**.

For paths starting with **./** or paths that are **.**, the path of the including file is substituted for **.**. For top-level programs given on the command-line, the current directory is used.

Import directives can optionally specify a search path to which the default is appended.

The default search path is the search path given to the **-L** command-line option, else **["~/.jq", "$ORIGIN/../lib/jq", "$ORIGIN/../lib"]**.

Null and empty string path elements terminate search path processing.

A dependency with relative path **foo/bar** would be searched for in **foo/bar.jq** and **foo/bar/bar.jq** in the given search path. This is intended to allow modules to be placed in a directory along with, for example, version control files, README files, and so on, but also to allow for single-file modules.

Consecutive components with the same name are not allowed to avoid ambiguities (e.g., **foo/foo**).

For example, with **-L$HOME/.jq** a module **foo** can be found in **$HOME/.jq/foo.jq** and **$HOME/.jq/foo/foo.jq**.

If **.jq** exists in the user´s home directory, and is a file (not a directory), it is automatically sourced into the main program.


## import RelativePathString as NAME [<metadata>];

Imports a module found at the given path relative to a directory in a search path. A **.jq** suffix will be added to the relative path string. The module´s symbols are prefixed with **NAME::**.

The optional metadata must be a constant jq expression. It should be an object with keys like **homepage** and so on. At this time jq only uses the **search** key/value of the metadata. The metadata is also made available to users via the **modulemeta** builtin.

The **search** key in the metadata, if present, should have a string or array value (array of strings); this is the search path to be prefixed to the top-level search path.


## include RelativePathString [<metadata>];

Imports a module found at the given path relative to a directory in a search path as if it were included in place. A **.jq** suffix will be added to the relative path string. The module´s symbols are imported into the caller´s namespace as if the module´s content had been included directly.

The optional metadata must be a constant jq expression. It should be an object with keys like **homepage** and so on. At this time jq only uses the **search** key/value of the metadata. The metadata is also made available to users via the **modulemeta** builtin.


## import RelativePathString as $NAME [<metadata>];

Imports a JSON file found at the given path relative to a directory in a search path. A **.json** suffix will be added to the relative path string. The file´s data will be available as **$NAME::NAME**.

The optional metadata must be a constant jq expression. It should be an object with keys like **homepage** and so on. At this time jq only uses the **search** key/value of the metadata. The metadata is also made available to users via the **modulemeta** builtin.

The **search** key in the metadata, if present, should have a string or array value (array of strings); this is the search path to be prefixed to the top-level search path.


## module <metadata>;

This directive is entirely optional. It´s not required for proper operation. It serves only the purpose of providing metadata that can be read with the **modulemeta** builtin.

The metadata must be a constant jq expression. It should be an object with keys like **homepage**. At this time jq doesn´t use this metadata, but it is made available to users via the **modulemeta** builtin.


## modulemeta

Takes a module name as input and outputs the module´s metadata as an object, with the module´s imports (including metadata) as an array value for the **deps** key and the module´s defined functions as an array value for the **defs** key.

Programs can use this to query a module´s metadata, which they could then use to, for example, search for, download, and install missing dependencies.

# COLORS

To configure alternative colors just set the **JQ_COLORS** environment variable to colon-delimited list of partial terminal escape sequences like **"1;31"**, in this order:

- color for **null**
- color for **false**
- color for **true**
- color for numbers
- color for strings
- color for arrays
- color for objects
- color for object keys

The default color scheme is the same as setting **JQ_COLORS="0;90:0;39:0;39:0;39:0;32:1;39:1;39:1;34"**.

This is not a manual for VT100/ANSI escapes. However, each of these color specifications should consist of two numbers separated by a semi-colon, where the first number is one of these:

- 1 (bright)
- 2 (dim)
- 4 (underscore)
- 5 (blink)
- 7 (reverse)
- 8 (hidden)

and the second is one of these:

- 30 (black)
- 31 (red)
- 32 (green)
- 33 (yellow)
- 34 (blue)
- 35 (magenta)
- 36 (cyan)
- 37 (white)

# BUGS

Presumably. Report them or discuss them at:

https://github.com/jqlang/jq/issues

# AUTHOR

Stephen Dolan **<mu@netsoc.tcd.ie>**

| May 2025 |   |
|---|---|
