---
title: "Policy Language (part 1/3)"
source: https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/
domain: rego-opa-policy
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: rego policy, open policy agent, policy as code, rego datalog rules
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 1/3
---

# Policy Language

OPA is purpose built for policy evaluation and uses its declarative language Rego to reason about structured data like API requests, infrastructure-as-code files, and configuration data. Rego lets you express desired rules and decisions as code, and is designed to be easy to read and write while being optimized for fast policy evaluation.

Rego queries are assertions on data that can be used to define policies and make decisions about whether data violates the expected state of your system. Rego was inspired by Datalog and extends it to support structured document models such as JSON.


## Why use Rego?

Use Rego for defining policy that is easy to read and write.

Rego focuses on providing support for referencing nested documents and ensuring that queries are correct and unambiguous.

Rego is declarative so policy authors can focus on what queries should return rather than how queries should be executed. These queries are simpler and more concise than the equivalent in an imperative language.

Like other applications which support declarative query languages, OPA is able to optimize queries to improve performance.


## Learning Rego

While reviewing the examples below, you might find it helpful to follow along using the online OPA playground. The playground also allows sharing of examples via URL which can be helpful when asking questions on the OPA Slack. In addition to these official resources, you may also be interested to check out the community learning materials and tools (6 projects).


## The Basics

This section introduces the main aspects of Rego.

The simplest rule is a single expression and is defined in terms of a scalar value. This `example` package defines a rule called `pi` that contains the value of pi:

```rego
package example

pi := 3.14159
```

Loading...

Rules can also be defined in terms of composite values:

```rego
package example

rect := {"width": 2, "height": 4}
```

Loading...

You can compare two scalar or composite values, and when you do so you are checking if the two values are the same JSON value.

```rego
package example

result := rect == {"width": 2, "height": 4}
```

Loading...

You can define a new concept using a rule. For example, `v` below is true if the equality expression is true. Evaluating `v` returns `undefined` because the body of the rule never evaluates to `true`. As a result, the document generated by the rule is not defined.

```rego
package example

v if "hello" == "world"
```

Loading...

Expressions that refer to undefined values are also undefined. This includes comparisons such as `!=`.

```rego
package example

v if "hello" == "world"

w if v != true
```

Loading...

Rules can also be defined in terms of variables:

```rego
package example

t if {
    x := 42
    y := 41
    x > y
}
```

Loading...

When evaluating rule bodies, OPA searches for variable bindings that make all of the expressions true. There may be multiple sets of bindings that make the rule body true. The rule body can be understood intuitively as:

```
expression-1 AND expression-2 AND ... AND expression-N
```

The rule itself can be understood intuitively as:

```
rule-name IS value IF body
```

If the **value** is not specified, it defaults to the boolean value of **true**.

Rego references help you refer to nested documents. The rule `prod_exists` asserts that there exists (at least) one document within `sites` where the `name` attribute equals `"prod"` using the `some` keyword.

```rego
package sites

sites := [{"name": "prod"}, {"name": "smoke1"}, {"name": "dev"}]

prod_exists if {
    some site in sites
    site.name == "prod"
}
```

Loading...

The example above can be generalized with a rule that defines a set document instead of a boolean value. Here `site_names` is a set of all the site's name values.

```rego
package sites

site_names contains name if {
    some site in sites
    name := site.name
}
```

Loading...

This section introduced the main aspects of Rego. The rest of this document walks those new to Rego through other important aspects of the language. Please review the Policy Reference for more detailed information about the Rego language.


## Scalar Values

Scalar values are the simplest type of term in Rego. Scalar values can be strings, numbers, booleans, or null.

Documents can be defined solely in terms of scalar values. This is useful for defining constants that are referenced in multiple places. For example:

```rego
package scalars

greeting   := "Hello"
max_height := 42
pi         := 3.14159
allowed    := true
location   := null
```

Loading...


## Strings

Rego supports two different types of syntax for declaring strings. The first is likely to be the most familiar: characters surrounded by double quotes. In such strings, certain characters must be escaped to appear in the string, such as double quotes themselves, backslashes, etc. See the Policy Reference for a formal definition.

The other type of string declaration is a raw string declaration. These are made of characters surrounded by backticks (`), with the exception that raw strings may not contain backticks themselves. Raw strings are what they sound like: escape sequences are not interpreted, but instead taken as the literal text inside the backticks. For example, the raw string `hello\there` will be the text "hello\there", not "hello" and "here" separated by a tab. Raw strings are particularly useful when constructing regular expressions for matching, as it eliminates the need to double escape special characters.

A simple example is a regex to match a valid Rego variable. With a regular string, the regex is `"[a-zA-Z_]\\w*"`, but with raw strings, it becomes `[a-zA-Z_]\w*`.

### String Interpolation

Runtime data can be incorporated into a string through string interpolation. An interpolated string is composed of a template-string containing zero or more template-expressions. The `$` character identifies a template-string, and can be used with regular double-quoted strings (`$"hello"`), and backtick-quoted raw strings ($`hello`).

A template-expression is enclosed in curly-braces (`{`,`}`), and must contain a single expression that evaluate to a value, e.g.:

- Primitive values: `$"{1} {2.3} {"foo"} {false} {null}"`
- Composite values: `$"{[true, false]} {{1, 2}} {{"a": "b"}}"`
- Variables: `x := "foo"; a := $"{x}"`
- References: `$"{input.x} {data.y}"`
- Function calls: `$"{abs(-1)} {1 + 2}"`
- Comprehensions: `$"{[x | ...]} {{x | ...}} {{x: y | ...}}"`

```rego
package interpolation

username := "Alice"

a := $"Hello {username}!"
```

Loading...

#### Undefined values

If a template-expression evaluates to an `undefined` value, the string `"<undefined>"` will be emitted instead. This means string interpolation is safe to use in cases where a string result is always expected, but not all expression values are guaranteed at evaluation time.

```rego
package interpolation

default role := "guest"
role := input.role
allowed_roles := ["admin", "employee"]

default location := "unknown"
location := input.location
allowed_locations := ["Narnia", "Mordor"]

deny contains $"User {input.username}'s role was '{role}', but must be one of {allowed_roles}" if {
    not role in allowed_roles
}

deny contains sprintf("User %s's location was '%s', but must be one of %v", [input.username, location, allowed_locations]) if {
    not location in allowed_locations
}
```

Loading...

In the above example, the `input.username` value is `undefined`; notice how

- the first `deny` rule uses string interpolation, and will output `User <undefined>'s role was 'guest', but must be one of ["admin", "employee"]`, whereas
- the second `deny` rule uses `sprintf`, and will output no result as it failed to evaluate even though `input.username` is inconsequential to the logic in the rule's body.

Compared to the `sprintf` built-in function, not halting evaluation on `undefined` values make interpolated strings less error-prone, and is therefore the recommended alternative.

#### Escaping

Since the left curly-brace (`{`) is reserved for starting a template-expression within a template-string, this character can be escaped with a backslash (`\`) in cases where a template expression is not wanted:

```rego
package interpolation

a := $"In this template-string, \{ will not start a template-expression."
```

Loading...

Left curly-brace escaping is also present for multi-line raw template-strings ($`\{}`), differentiating them from regular raw strings, where no escaping is recognized.


## Composite Values

Composite values define collections. In simple cases, composite values can be treated as constants like scalar values:

```rego
package composite

cuboid := {"width": 3, "height": 4, "depth": 5}
```

Loading...

Composite values can also be defined in terms of variables or references. For example:

```rego
package composite_variables

a := 42
b := false
c := null
d := {"a": a, "x": [b, c]}
```

Loading...

By defining composite values in terms of variables and references, rules can define abstractions over raw data and other rules.

### Arrays

Arrays are ordered collections of values. Arrays in Rego are zero-indexed, and may contain any value, including variable references.

```rego
package arrays

pi := 3.14
arr := [1, "two", pi*2]
last := arr[2]
```

Loading...

Use arrays when order matters or when duplicate values are required.

### Objects

Objects are unordered key-value collections. In Rego, any value type can be used as an object key. For example, the following assignment maps port **numbers** to a list of IP addresses (represented as strings).

```rego
package objects

ips_by_port := {
    80: ["10.0.0.1", "10.10.10.1"],
    443: ["10.1.1.1"],
}

result := ips_by_port[80]
```

Loading...

When Rego values are converted to JSON non-string object keys are marshalled as strings (because JSON does not support non-string object keys).

```rego
package objects

json := ips_by_port
```

Loading...

### Sets

In addition to arrays and objects, Rego supports set values. Sets are unordered collections of unique values. Just like other composite values, sets can be defined in terms of scalars, variables, references, and other composite values. For example:

```rego
package sets

s1 := {1,2,3}
s2 := {3,2,1}

sets_equal := s1 == s2
```

Loading...

warning

Set documents are collections of values without keys or order. OPA represents sets as arrays when serializing to JSON or other formats that do not support a set data type. The important distinction between sets and arrays or objects is that sets are unkeyed while arrays and objects are keyed, i.e., you cannot refer to the index of an element within a set.

Sets share their curly-brace syntax with objects, and an empty object is defined with `{}`, an empty set has to be constructed with a different syntax:

```rego
package sets

empty := count(set())
not_empty :=  count({1, 2, 3})
empty_object := count({})
not_equal := {} == {e| some e in []}
```

Loading...

warning

The built-in function `count({})` will still return `0` because `{}` is an empty object. However, since `{}` is not a set, it will not equal `set()` or something that evaluates to an empty set.


## Variables

Variables are another kind of term in Rego. They appear in both the head and body of rules.

Variables appearing in the head of a rule can be thought of as input and output of the rule. Unlike many programming languages, where a variable is either an input or an output, in Rego a variable is simultaneously an input and an output. If a query supplies a value for a variable, that variable is an input, and if the query does not supply a value for a variable, that variable is an output.

For example:

```rego
package variables

sites := [
    {"name": "prod"},
    {"name": "smoke1"},
    {"name": "dev"}
]

q contains name if {
    
    some site in sites
    name := site.name
}
```

Loading...

In this case, evaluating `q` with a variable `x` (which is not bound to a value) returns all of the values for `x` and all of the values for `q[x]`, which are always the same because `q` is a set.

```rego
package variables

result := { x | q[x] }
```

Loading...

On the other hand, evaluating `q` with an input value for `name` determines whether `name` exists in the document defined by `q`:

```rego
package variables

result := q["dev"]
```

Loading...

Variables appearing in the head of a rule must also appear in a non-negated equality expression within the same rule. This property ensures that if the rule is evaluated and all of the expressions evaluate to true for some set of variable bindings, the variable in the head of the rule will be defined.


## References

References are used to access nested documents.

The examples that follow use some data defined in

data.example.*

here

```rego
package example

sites := [
    {
        "region": "east",
        "name": "prod",
        "servers": [
            {
                "name": "web-0",
                "hostname": "hydrogen"
            },
            {
                "name": "web-1",
                "hostname": "helium"
            },
            {
                "name": "db-0",
                "hostname": "lithium"
            }
        ]
    },
    {
        "region": "west",
        "name": "smoke",
        "servers": [
            {
                "name": "web-1000",
                "hostname": "beryllium"
            },
            {
                "name": "web-1001",
                "hostname": "boron"
            },
            {
                "name": "db-1000",
                "hostname": "carbon"
            }
        ]
    },
    {
        "region": "west",
        "name": "dev",
        "servers": [
            {
                "name": "web-dev",
                "hostname": "nitrogen"
            },
            {
                "name": "db-dev",
                "hostname": "oxygen"
            }
        ]
    }
]

apps := [
    {
        "name": "web",
        "servers": ["web-0", "web-1", "web-1000", "web-1001", "web-dev"]
    },
    {
        "name": "mysql",
        "servers": ["db-0", "db-1000"]
    },
    {
        "name": "mongodb",
        "servers": ["db-dev"]
    }
]

containers := [
    {
        "image": "redis",
        "ipaddress": "10.0.0.1",
        "name": "big_stallman"
    },
    {
        "image": "nginx",
        "ipaddress": "10.0.0.2",
        "name": "cranky_euclid"
    }
]
```

The simplest reference contains no variables. For example, the following reference returns the hostname of the second server in the first site document from the example data:

```rego
package references

import data.example.sites

result := sites[0].servers[1].hostname
```

Loading...

References are typically written using the “dot-access” style. The canonical form does away with `.` and closely resembles dictionary lookup in a language such as Python:

```rego
package references

import data.example.sites

result := sites[0]["servers"][1]["hostname"]
```

Loading...

Both forms are valid, however, the dot-access style is typically more readable. Note that there are four cases where brackets must be used:

1. String keys containing characters other than `[a-z]`, `[A-Z]`, `[0-9]`, or `_` (underscore).
2. Non-string keys such as numbers, booleans, and null.
3. Variable keys which are described later.
4. Composite keys which are described later.

The prefix of a reference identifies the root document for that reference. In the example above this is `sites`. The root document may be:

- a local variable inside a rule.
- a rule inside the same package.
- a document stored in OPA.
- a documented temporarily provided to OPA as part of a transaction.
- an array, object or set, e.g. `[1, 2, 3][0]`.
- a function call, e.g. `split("a.b.c", ".")[1]`.
- a comprehension.

### Variable Keys

References can include variables as keys. References written this way are used to select a value from every element in a collection.

The following reference will select the hostnames of all the servers in the example data:

```rego
package references

import data.example.sites

result := {h| h := sites[i].servers[j].hostname}
```

Loading...

Conceptually, this is the same as the following imperative code:

```python
def hostnames(sites):
    result = set()

    for site in sites:
        for server in site.servers:
            result.add(server.hostname)

    return result
```

In the reference above, variables named `i` and `j` were used to iterate the collections. If the variables are unused outside the reference, the convention is to replace them with an underscore (`_`) character. The reference above can be rewritten as:

```rego
sites[_].servers[_].hostname
```

The underscore is special because it cannot be referred to by other parts of the rule, e.g., the other side of the expression, another expression, etc. The underscore can be thought of as a special iterator. Each time an underscore is specified, a new iterator is instantiated.

info

Under the hood, OPA translates the `_` character to a unique variable name that does not conflict with variables and rules that are in scope.

### Composite Keys

References can include composite values as keys if the key is being used to refer into a set. Composite keys may not be used in refs for base data documents, they are only valid for references into virtual documents.

This is useful for checking for the presence of composite values within a set, or extracting all values within a set matching some pattern. For example:

```rego
package composite_key

s := {[1, 2], [1, 4], [2, 6]}

result := {
 "exists": {e| e:= s[[1, 2]] },
 "matching": {e| e:= s[[1, _]] }
}
```

Loading...

### Multiple Expressions

Rules are often written in terms of multiple expressions that contain references to documents. In the following example, the rule defines a set of arrays where each array contains an application name and a hostname of a server where the application is deployed.

```rego
package multiple_exprs

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

apps_and_hostnames contains [name, hostname] if {
    some i, j, k
    name := apps[i].name
    server := apps[i].servers[_]
    sites[j].servers[k].name == server
    hostname := sites[j].servers[k].hostname
}
```

Loading...

Don't worry about understanding everything in this example right now. There are just two important points:

1. Several variables appear more than once in the body. When a variable is used in multiple locations, OPA will only produce documents for the rule with the variable bound to the same value in all expressions.
2. The rule is joining the `apps` and `sites` documents implicitly. In Rego (and other languages based on Datalog), joins are implicit.

### Self-Joins

Using a different key on the same array or object provides the equivalent of self-join in SQL. For example, the following rule defines a document containing apps deployed on the same site as `"mysql"`:

```rego
package multiple_exprs

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

same_site contains apps[k].name if {
    some i, j, k
    apps[i].name == "mysql"

    server := apps[i].servers[_]
    server == sites[j].servers[_].name

    other_server := sites[j].servers[_].name
    server != other_server

    other_server == apps[k].servers[_]
}
```

Loading...


## Comprehensions

Comprehensions provide a concise way of building composite values from sub-queries.

Like rules, comprehensions consist of a head and a body. The body of a comprehension can be understood in exactly the same way as the body of a rule, that is, one or more expressions that must all be true in order for the overall body to be true. When the body evaluates to true, the head of the comprehension is evaluated to produce an element in the result.

The body of a comprehension is able to refer to variables defined in the outer body. For example:

```rego
package comprehensions

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

region := "west"
names := [name | sites[i].region == region; name := sites[i].name]
```

Loading...

In the above query, the second expression contains an array comprehension that refers to the `region` variable. The region variable will be bound in the outer body.

> When a comprehension refers to a variable in an outer body, OPA will reorder expressions in the outer body so that variables referred to in the comprehension are bound by the time the comprehension is evaluated.

Comprehensions are similar to the same constructs found in other languages like Python. For example, the above comprehension in Python would be:

```python
names = [site.name for site in sites if site.region == "west"]
```

Comprehensions are often used to group elements by some key. A common use case for comprehensions is to assist in computing aggregate values (e.g., the number of containers running on a host).

### Array Comprehensions

Array comprehensions build array values out of sub-queries. Array comprehensions have the form:

```
[ <term> | <body> ]
```

For example, the following rule defines an object where the keys are application names and the values are hostnames of servers where the application is deployed. The hostnames of servers are represented as an array.

```rego
package comprehensions

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

app_to_hostnames[app_name] := hostnames if {
    app := apps[_]
    app_name := app.name
    hostnames := [hostname | name := app.servers[_]
                            s := sites[_].servers[_]
                            s.name == name
                            hostname := s.hostname]
}
```

Loading...

### Object Comprehensions

Object comprehensions build object values out of sub-queries. Object comprehensions have the form:

```
{ <key>: <term> | <body> }
```

Object comprehensions can rewrite the rule above as a comprehension instead:

```rego
package comprehensions

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

app_to_hostnames := {app.name: hostnames |
    app := apps[_]
    hostnames := [hostname |
                    name := app.servers[_]
                    s := sites[_].servers[_]
                    s.name == name
                    hostname := s.hostname]
}
```

Loading...

Object comprehensions are not allowed to have conflicting entries, similar to rules:

```rego
package comprehensions

conflicting := { "foo": i |
    some i in [1, 2]
}
```

Loading...

### Set Comprehensions

Set comprehensions build a set values out of sub-queries. Set comprehensions have the following form, where terms are selected from the body to be set members:

```
{ <term> | <body> }
```

For example, to construct a set from an array, use `e` where `e` is an element in the array:

```rego
package comprehensions

my_array := [1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3]
my_set := {e | some e in my_array}
```

Loading...


## Rules

Rules define the content of virtual documents in OPA. When OPA evaluates a rule, OPA *generates* the content of the document that is defined by the rule.

The sample code in this section make use of the data defined in References.

### Generating Sets

The following rule defines a set containing the hostnames of all servers in the example data:

```rego
package sets

import data.example.sites

hostnames contains name if {
    name := sites[_].servers[_].hostname
}
```

Loading...

Querying the content of the new `hostnames` rule returns the same data as querying using the `sites[_].servers[_].hostname` reference directly.

This example introduces a few important aspects of Rego.

First, the rule defines a set document where the contents are defined by the variable `name`. This rule defines a set document because the head only includes a key. All rules have the following form (where key, value, and body are all optional):

```
<name> <key>? <value>? <body>?
```

tip

If the value had been set, this would create an object instead.

For a more formal definition of the rule syntax, see the Policy Reference document.

Second, the `sites[_].servers[_].hostname` fragment selects the `hostname` attribute from all the objects in the `servers` collection. From reading the fragment in isolation, it is not possible to tell whether the fragment refers to arrays or objects. It only indicates a collection of values.

Third, the `name := sites[_].servers[_].hostname` expression binds the value of the `hostname` attribute to the variable `name`, which is also declared in the head of the rule.

### Generating Objects

Rules that define objects are very similar to rules that define sets. Note that object rules have a key and a value in the head of the rule.

```rego
package objects

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

apps_by_hostname[hostname] := app if {
    some i
    server := sites[_].servers[_]
    hostname := server.hostname
    apps[i].servers[_] == server.name
    app := apps[i].name
}
```

Loading...

The rule above defines an object that maps hostnames to app names. The main difference between this rule and one which defines a set is the rule head: in addition to declaring a key, the rule head also declares a value for the document.

### Incremental Definitions

A rule may be defined multiple times with the same name. When a rule is defined this way, the rule definition is called *incremental* because each definition is additive. The document produced by incrementally defined rules is the union of the documents produced by each individual rule.

An incrementally defined rule can be intuitively understood as `<rule-1> OR <rule-2> OR ... OR <rule-N>`.

For example, a rule can abstract over the `servers` and `containers` data as `instances`:

```rego
package incremental

import data.example.sites
import data.example.containers

instances contains instance if {
    server := sites[_].servers[_]
    instance := {"address": server.hostname, "name": server.name}
}

instances contains instance if {
    some container in containers
    instance := {"address": container.ipaddress, "name": container.name}
}
```

Loading...

### Complete Definitions

In addition to rules that *partially* define sets and objects, Rego also supports so-called *complete* definitions of any type of document. Rules provide a complete definition by omitting the key in the head. Complete definitions are commonly used for constants:

```rego
pi := 3.14159
```

info

Rego allows authors to omit the body of rules. If the body is omitted, it defaults to true.

Documents produced by rules with complete definitions can only have one value at a time. If evaluation produces multiple values for the same document, an error will be returned.

For example:

```rego
package complete

user := "bob"

power_users := {"alice", "bob", "fred"}
restricted_users := {"bob", "kim"}

max_memory := 32 if power_users[user]

max_memory := 4 if restricted_users[user]
```

Loading...

OPA returns an error in this case because the rule definitions are in *conflict*. The value produced by `max_memory` cannot be 32 and 4 **at the same time**.

The documents produced by rules with complete definitions may still be undefined:

```rego
package undefined

import data.complete.max_memory

result := m if {
    m := max_memory with data.complete.user as "johnson"
}
```

Loading...

In some cases, having an undefined result for a document is not desirable. In those cases, policies can use the `default` keyword to provide a fallback value.

### Rule Heads containing References

As a shorthand for defining nested rule structures, it's valid to use references as rule heads. This module defines *two complete rules*, `data.example.fruit.apple.seeds` and `data.example.fruit.orange.color`:

```rego
package rule_refs

fruit.apple.seeds := 12

fruit.orange.color := "orange"
```

Loading...

#### Variables in Rule Head References

Any term, except the very first, in a rule head's reference can be a variable. These variables can be assigned within the rule, just as for any other partial rule, to dynamically construct a nested collection of objects.

input.json

```json
{
  "users": [
    {
      "id": "alice",
      "role": "employee",
      "country": "USA"
    },
    {
      "id": "bob",
      "role": "customer",
      "country": "USA"
    },
    {
      "id": "dora",
      "role": "admin",
      "country": "Sweden"
    }
  ],
  "admins": [
    {
      "id": "charlie"
    }
  ]
}
```

```rego
package roles

users_by_role[role][id] := user if {
    some user in input.users
    id := user.id
    role := user.role
}

users_by_role.admin[id] := user if {
    some user in input.admins
    id := user.id
}

users_by_country[country] contains user.id if {
    some user in input.users
    country := user.country
}
```

Loading...

##### Conflicts

The first variable declared in a rule head's reference divides the reference in a leading constant portion and a trailing dynamic portion. Other rules are allowed to overlap with the dynamic portion (dynamic extent) without causing a compile-time conflict.

```rego
package example

p[x].r := y if {
    x := "q"
    y := 1
}

p.q.r := 2
```

Loading...

In the above example, rule `R2` overlaps with the dynamic portion of rule `R1`'s reference (`[x].r`), which is allowed at compile-time, as these rules aren't guaranteed to produce conflicting output. However, as `R1` defines `x` as `"q"` and `y` as `1`, a conflict will be reported at evaluation-time.

Conflicts are detected at compile-time, where possible, between rules even if they are within the dynamic extent of another rule.

```rego
package example

p[x].r := y if {
    x := "foo"
    y := 1
}

p.q.r := 2

p.q.r.s := 3
```

Loading...

Above, `R2` and `R3` are within the dynamic extent of `R1`, but are in conflict with each other, which is detected at compile-time (note the `rego_type_error`, rather than `eval_conflict_error` seen above).

Rules are also not allowed to overlap with object values of other rules:

```rego
package example

p.q.r := {"s": 1}

p[x].r.t := 2 if {
    x := "q"
}
```

Loading...

In the above example, `R1` is within the dynamic extent of `R2` and a conflict cannot be detected at compile-time. However, at evaluation-time `R2` will attempt to inject a value under key `t` in an object value defined by `R1`. This is a conflict, as rules are not allowed to modify or replace values defined by other rules. There is no conflict when the policy is updated to the following:

```rego
package example

p.q.r.s := 1

p[x].r.t := 2 if {
    x := "q"
}
```

Loading...

As `R1` is now instead defining a value within the dynamic extent of `R2`'s reference, which is allowed:

### Functions

Rego supports user-defined functions that can be called with the same semantics as built-in functions. They have access to both the data document and the input document.

For example, the following function will return the result of trimming the spaces from a string and then splitting it by periods.

```rego
package functions

trim_and_split(s) := x if {
     t := trim(s, " ")
     x := split(t, ".")
}

result := trim_and_split("   foo.bar ")
```

Loading...

Functions may have an arbitrary number of inputs, but exactly one output. Function arguments may be any kind of term. For example, consider the following function:

```rego
package functions

foo([x, {"bar": y}]) := z if {
    z := {x: y}
}
```

The following calls would produce the logical mappings given:

| Call | `x` | `y` |
|---|---|---|
| `z := foo(a)` | `a[0]` | `a[1].bar` |
| `z := foo(["5", {"bar": "hello"}])` | `"5"` | `"hello"` |
| `z := foo(["5", {"bar": [1, 2, 3, ["foo", "bar"]]}])` | `"5"` | `[1, 2, 3, ["foo", "bar"]]` |

If you need multiple outputs, write your functions so that the output is an array, object or set containing your results. If the output term is omitted, it is equivalent to having the output term be the literal `true`. Furthermore, `if` can be used to write shorter definitions. That is, the function declarations below are equivalent:

```rego
package functions

f(x) if { x == "foo" }
f(x) if x == "foo"

f(x) := true if { x == "foo" }
f(x) := true if x == "foo"
```

The outputs of user functions have some additional limitations, namely that they must resolve to a single value. If you write a function that has multiple possible bindings for an output variable, you will get a conflict error:

```rego
package functions

p(x) := y if {
    y := x[_]
}

result := p([1, 2, 3])
```

Loading...

It is possible in Rego to define a function more than once, to achieve a conditional selection of which function to execute:

Functions can be defined incrementally.

```rego
package incremental

q("single", x) := y if {
    y := x
}

q("double", x) := y if {
    y := x*2
}
```

```rego
package incremental

result := q("single", 2)
```

Loading...

```rego
package incremental

result := q("double", 2)
```

Loading...

A given function call will execute all functions that match the signature given. If a call matches multiple functions, they must produce the same output, or else a conflict error will occur:

```rego
package incremental

r(1, x) := y if {
    y := x
}

r(x, 2) := y if {
    y := x*4
}

result := r(1, 2)
```

Loading...

On the other hand, if a call matches no functions, then the result is undefined.

```rego
package imcremental

s(x, 2) := y if {
    y := x * 4
}

result := s(5, 3)
```

Loading...

#### Function overloading

Rego does not support the overloading of functions by the number of parameters. If two function definitions are given with the same function name but different numbers of parameters, a compile-time type error is generated.

```rego
package function_overloading_error

r(x) := result if {
    result := 2*x
}

r(x, y) := result if {
    result := 2*x + 3*y
}
```

Loading...

In the unusual case that it is critical to use the same name, the function could be made to take the list of parameters as a single array. However, this approach is not generally recommended because it sacrifices some helpful compile-time checking and can be quite error-prone.

```rego
package function_overloading_array

r(params) := result if {
    count(params) == 1
    result := 2*params[0]
}

r(params) := result if {
    count(params) == 2
    result := 2*params[0] + 3*params[1]
}

result := [r([10]), r([10, 1])]
```

Loading...


## Negation

important

Users are recommended to use the `future.keywords.not` import whenever using the `not` keyword, as it fixes a long-standing semantic issue with negation in Rego. Read more about it in the Improved Negation Semantics section of the `not` keyword overview.

To generate the content of a virtual document, OPA attempts to bind variables in the body of the rule such that all expressions in the rule evaluate to True.

This generates the correct result when the expressions represent assertions about what states should exist in the data stored in OPA. In some cases, you want to express that certain states *should not* exist in the data stored in OPA. In these cases, negation must be used.

For safety, a variable appearing in a negated expression must also appear in another non-negated equality expression in the rule.

> OPA will reorder expressions to ensure that negated expressions are evaluated after other non-negated expressions with the same variables. OPA will reject rules containing negated expressions that do not meet the safety criteria described above.

The simplest use of negation involves only scalar values or variables and is equivalent to complementing the operator:

```rego
package negation

t if {
    greeting := "hello"
    not greeting == "goodbye"
}
```

Loading...

Negation is required to check whether some value *does not* exist in a collection: `not p["foo"]`. That is not the same as complementing the `==` operator in an expression `p[_] == "foo"` which yields `p[_] != "foo"` which means for any item in `p`, return true if the item is not `"foo"`. See more details in the Regal documentation.

For example, a rule can define a document containing names of apps not deployed on the `"prod"` site:

```rego
package negation

import data.example.apps
import data.example.sites

prod_servers contains name if {
    some site in sites
    site.name == "prod"
    some server in site.servers
    name := server.name
}

apps_in_prod contains name if {
    some site in sites
    some app in apps
    name := app.name
    some server in app.servers
    prod_servers[server]
}

apps_not_in_prod contains name if {
    some app in apps
    name := app.name
    not apps_in_prod[name]
}
```

Loading...

info

Logical OR/AND in Rego is structured differently from other languages you might be familiar with. See the notes here on logical OR or here for logical AND for more details.

tip

Have a look at the other examples for `not` in the examples section to learn more about using this keyword.


## Universal Quantification (FOR ALL)

Rego allows for several ways to express universal quantification.

For example, imagine you want to express a policy that says in natural language:

```
There must be no apps named "bitcoin-miner".
```

The most expressive way to state this in Rego is using the `every` keyword:

```rego
no_bitcoin_miners_using_every if {
    every app in apps {
        app.name != "bitcoin-miner"
    }
}
```

Variables in Rego are *existentially quantified* by default: when you write

```rego
array := ["one", "two", "three"]
array[i] == "three"
```

The query will be satisfied **if there is an `i`** such that the query's expressions are simultaneously satisfied.

Therefore, there are other ways to express the desired policy.

For this policy, you can also define a rule that finds if there exists a bitcoin-mining app (which is easy using the `some` keyword). And then you use negation to check that there is NO bitcoin-mining app. Technically, you're using a negation and an existential quantifier, which is logically the same as a universal quantifier.

For example:

```rego
package negation

import data.example.apps

no_bitcoin_miners_using_negation if not any_bitcoin_miners

any_bitcoin_miners if {
    some app in apps
    app.name == "bitcoin-miner"
}
```

```rego
package negation

result := true if {
    no_bitcoin_miners_using_negation
        with data.example.apps as [{"name": "web"}]
}
```

Loading...

```rego
package negation

result := true if {
    no_bitcoin_miners_using_negation
        with data.example.apps as [{"name": "bitcoin-miner"}, {"name": "web"}]
}
```

Loading...

info

The `undefined` result above is expected because no default value was defined for `no_bitcoin_miners_using_negation`. Since the body of the rule fails to match, there is no value generated.

A common mistake is to try encoding the policy with a rule named `no_bitcoin_miners` like so:

```rego
no_bitcoin_miners if {
    app := apps[_]
    app.name != "bitcoin-miner" 
}
```

It becomes clear that this is incorrect when you use the `some` keyword, because the rule is true whenever there is SOME app that is not a bitcoin-miner:

```rego
no_bitcoin_miners if {
    some app in apps
    app.name != "bitcoin-miner" 
}
```

The reason the rule is incorrect is that variables in Rego are *existentially quantified*. This means that rule bodies and queries express FOR ANY and not FOR ALL. To express FOR ALL in Rego complement the logic in the rule body (e.g., `!=` becomes `==`) and then complement the check using negation (e.g., `no_bitcoin_miners` becomes `not any_bitcoin_miners`).

Alternatively, the same kind of logic can be implemented inside a single rule using comprehensions.

```rego
no_bitcoin_miners_using_comprehension if {
    bitcoin_miners := {app | some app in apps; app.name == "bitcoin-miner"}
    count(bitcoin_miners) == 0
}
```

info

Whether you use negation, comprehensions, or `every` to express FOR ALL is up to you. The `every` keyword should lend itself nicely to a rule formulation that closely follows how requirements are stated, and thus enhances your policy's readability.

The comprehension version is more concise than the negation variant, and does not require a helper rule while the negation version is more verbose but a bit simpler and allows for more complex ORs.

tip

Have a look at the other examples for `some` and `every` in the examples section.


## Modules

In Rego, policies are defined inside *modules*. Modules consist of:

- Exactly one package declaration.
- Zero or more import statements.
- Zero or more rule definitions.

Modules are typically represented in Unicode text and encoded in UTF-8.

Comments begin with the `#` character and continue until the end of the line.

### Packages

Packages group the rules defined in one or more modules into a particular namespace. Because rules are namespaced they can be safely shared across projects.

Modules contributing to the same package do not have to be located in the same directory.

The rules defined in a module are automatically exported. That is, they can be queried under OPA’s Data API provided the appropriate package is given. For example, given the following module:

```rego
package opa.examples

pi := 3.14159
```

The `pi` document can be queried via the Data API:

```http
GET https://example.com/v1/data/opa/examples/pi HTTP/1.1
```

Valid package names are variables or references that only contain string operands. For example, these are all valid package names:

```rego
package foo
package foo.bar
package foo.bar.baz
package foo["bar.baz"].qux
```

These are invalid package names:

```rego
package 1foo        
package foo[1].bar  
```

For more details see the language grammar.

### Imports

Import statements declare dependencies that modules have on documents defined outside the package. By importing a document, the identifiers exported by that document can be referenced within the current module.

All modules contain implicit statements which import the `data` and `input` documents.

Modules use the same syntax to declare dependencies on base and virtual documents.

For example, the following document can be imported and used as follows:

```rego
package example

servers := [
    {
        "id": "app",
        "protocols": ["https", "ssh"]
    },
    {
        "id": "db",
        "protocols": ["mysql"]
    },
    {
        "id": "ci",
        "protocols": ["http"]
    }
]
```

```rego
package opa.examples

import data.example.servers

http_servers contains server if {
    some server in servers
    "http" in server.protocols
}
```

Similarly, modules can declare dependencies on query arguments by specifying an import path that starts with `input`.

input.json

```json
{
  "user": "paul",
  "method": "GET"
}
```

```rego
package examples

import input.user
import input.method

allow if user == "alice"

allow if {
    user == "bob"
    method == "GET"
}

allow if {
    method == "GET"
    input.user in data.roles["dev"]
}

allow if {
    user == "catherine"
    day := time.weekday(time.now_ns())
    day in ["Saturday", "Sunday"]
}
```

Imports can include an optional `as` keyword to resolve namespacing conflicts:

```rego
package opa.examples

import data.example.servers as my_servers

http_servers contains server if {
    some server in my_servers
    "http" in server.protocols
}
```


## In Keyword

More expressive membership and existential quantification keyword:

input.json

```json
{ "roles": ["denylisted-role", "another-role"] }
```

```rego
deny if {
    some x in input.roles 
    x == "denylisted-role"
}

deny if {
    "denylisted-role" in input.roles 
}
```

See the keywords docs for details.


## If Keyword

This keyword allows more expressive rule heads:

input.json

```json
{
  "token": "secret"
}
```

```rego
deny if input.token != "secret"
```


## Contains Keyword

This keyword allows more expressive rule heads for partial set rules:

```rego
deny contains msg if { msg := "forbidden" }
```


## Some Keyword

The `some` keyword allows queries to explicitly declare local variables. Use the `some` keyword in rules that contain unification statements or references with variable operands **if** variables contained in those statements are not declared using `:=` .

| Statement | Example | Variables |
|---|---|---|
| Unification | `input.a = [["b", x], [y, "c"]]` | `x` and `y` |
| Reference with variable operands | `data.foo[i].bar[j]` | `i` and `j` |

For example, the following rule generates tuples of array indices for servers in the "west" region that contain "db" in their name. The first element in the tuple is the site index and the second element is the server index.

```rego
package tuples

import data.example.sites

tuples contains [i, j] if {
    some i, j
    sites[i].region == "west"
    server := sites[i].servers[j] 
    contains(server.name, "db")
}
```

Loading...

Querying for the tuples returns two results. Since `i`, `j`, and `server` are declared as local, it is possible to introduce rules in the same package without affecting the result above:

```rego
i := 1
```

Without declaring `i` with the `some` keyword, introducing the `i` rule above would have changed the result of `tuples` because the `i` symbol in the body would capture the global value. Try removing `some i, j` and see what happens!

The `some` keyword is not required but it's recommended to avoid situations like the one above where introduction of a rule inside a package could change behaviour of other rules.

For using the `some` keyword with iteration, see the documentation of the `in` operator.


## Every Keyword

```rego
package example

import data.example.sites

names_with_dev if {
    some site in sites
    site.name == "dev"

    every server in site.servers {
        endswith(server.name, "-dev")
    }
}
```

Loading...

The `every` keyword takes an (optional) key argument, a value argument, a domain, and a block of further queries, its "body".

The keyword is used to explicitly assert that its body is true for *any element in the domain*. It will iterate over the domain, bind its variables, and check that the body holds for those bindings. If one of the bindings does not yield a successful evaluation of the body, the overall statement is undefined.

If the domain is empty, the overall statement is true.

Evaluating `every` does **not** introduce new bindings into the rule evaluation.

Used with a key argument, the index, or property name (for objects), comes into the scope of the body evaluation:

```rego
package example

array_domain if {
    every i, x in [1, 2, 3] { x-i == 1 } 
}

object_domain if {
    every k, v in {"foo": "bar", "fox": "baz" } { 
        startswith(k, "f")
        startswith(v, "b")
    }
}

set_domain if {
    every x in {1, 2, 3} { x != 4 } 
}
```

Loading...

Negating `every` is forbidden. If you need to express `not every x in xs { p(x) }` please use `some x in xs; not p(x)` instead.
