---
title: "List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1925 (part 3/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/15_&_16_Geo._5
domain: church-of-scotland
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: church of scotland
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 3/3
---

# List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1925

31 July 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made by the Minister of Transport under the Tramways Act 1870

relating to Liverpool Corporation Tramways and Sheffield Corporation Tramways.

Liverpool Corporation Tramways Order 1925

Order authorising the lord mayor aldermen and citizens of the city of Liverpool to construct additional tramways in the said city and for other purposes.

Sheffield Corporation Tramways Order 1925

Order authorising the lord mayor aldermen and citizens of the city of Sheffield to construct an additional tramway in the said city and for other purposes.

Leicester Fire Brigade Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxvi

31 July 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order made by one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State under section thirty-two of the Police Pensions Act 1921

modifying the provisions of Part IX. of the Leicester Corporation Act 1908

in respect of the pensions allowance and gratuities payable to members of the permanent fire brigade of the City of Leicester their widows children and dependants.

(Repealed by

Leicester Corporation Act 1956

(

4 & 5 Eliz. 2

. c. xlix))

Provisional Order made in pursuance of section 32 of the Police Pensions Act 1921.

Salford Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxvii

31 July 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order made by one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State under the Public Health Act 1875

relating to Salford.

Salford Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Salford Corporation Act 1920.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 3) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxviii

31 July 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Abergavenny Brighton Colwyn Bay and Colwyn Parts of Holland Mitcham Newton in Mackerfield Shoreham-by-Sea and Stoke-on-Trent.

Abergavenny Order 1925

Provisional Order for partially repealing altering or amending certain Local Acts.

Brighton (Poor Law) Order 1925

Provisional Order for partially repealing and altering the Local Act 6 George IV. Chapter clxxix.

Colwyn Bay and Colwyn Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending the Colwyn Bay and Colwyn Urban District Council Act 1902.

County of the Parts of Holland Order 1925

Provisional Order made in pursuance of Sections 69 (2) and 87 of the Local Government Act 1888.

Mitcham Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending the Mitcham Urban District Council Act 1923.

Newton in Mackerfield Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Newton District Improvement Act 1855.

Shoreham-by-Sea Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Urban District Council of Shoreham-by-Sea to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Stoke-on-Trent Special Rates Order 1925

Provisional Order made in pursuance of Section 59 of the Local Government Act 1888

and Section 303 of the Public Health Act 1875

to amend the Borough of Stoke-on-Trent Order 1908 the Stoke-on-Trent (Extension) Order 1921 and the Stoke-on-Trent Corporation Act 1923.

Air Ministry (Cattewater Seaplane Station) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxix

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm an agreement between the Cattewater Commissioners and the President of the Air Council in relation to the acquisition of certain lands in the county of Devon and for purposes in connection therewith.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxx

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Blackburn Guisborough Joint Hospital District Harrogate Liverpool Newcastle-upon-Tyne Newport (Isle of Wight) and Swansea.

Blackburn Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending certain Local Acts.

Guisborough Joint Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for forming a United District under Section 279 of the Public Health Act 1875.

Harrogate Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Harrogate Improvement Act 1841

the Harrogate Corporation Act 1893

and two Confirming Acts.

Liverpool Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending the Liverpool Corporation Act 1921.

Newcastle-upon-Tyne Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending the Newcastle-upon-Tyne Corporation Act 1904.

Newport (Isle of Wight) Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Newport (Isle of Wight) Borough Act 1876.

Swansea Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending certain Local Acts.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 5) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxi

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Bury Saint Edmund's Hastings Northampton Paignton Poole and Sheffield.

Bury Saint Edmund's Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Bury Saint Edmund's Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Hastings Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Hastings Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Northampton Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Northampton Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Paignton Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Urban District Council of Paignton to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Poole Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Poole Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Sheffield (Compulsory Purchase of Lands) Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Sheffield Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 6) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxii

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Beckenham Brighton Bury Richmond (Surrey) Southend-on-Sea and Swindon.

Beckenham Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Urban District Council of Beckenham to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Brighton Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Brighton Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Bury Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Bury Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Richmond (Surrey) Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Richmond (Surrey) Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Southend-on-Sea Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Southend-on-Sea Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Swindon Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Swindon Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts and to amend the Swindon Corporation (Wilts and Berks Canal Abandonment) Act 1914.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 7) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxiii

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Birstal Bournemouth Huddersfield Kettering Joint Hospital District South Staffordshire Joint Smallpox Hospital District and Worcester.

Birstal Order 1925

Provisional Order for partially repealing the Birstal Local Board Act 1872.

Bournemouth Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Bournemouth Corporation Act 1904.

Huddersfield Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Huddersfield Corporation Act 1906.

Kettering Joint Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending the Kettering Joint Hospital Order 1895.

South Staffordshire Joint Small-pox Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering certain Orders confirmed by Parliament.

Worcester Order 1925

Provisional Order for repealing the Local Act 7 Will. IV. Cap. Ivii.

relating to the City of Worcester and for amending the Worcester Extension Act 1885.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 8) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxiv

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Adwick-leStreet Gloucester Keighley Peterborough and Southport.

Adwick-le-Street Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Urban District Council of Adwick-le-Street to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Gloucester Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Gloucester Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Keighley Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Keighley Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Peterborough Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Peterborough Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Southport Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Southport Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 9) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxv

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Abingdon Joint Hospital District Earsdon Joint Hospital District Flint Sheffield South Chilterns Joint Smallpox Hospital District West Hartlepool and Weymouth and Melcombe Regis.

Abingdon Joint Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering the Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Act 1898.

Earsdon Joint Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering a Confirming Act.

County of Flint Order 1925

Provisional Order made in pursuance of subsection (2) of Section 69 of the Local Government Act 1888.

Sheffield Order 1925

Provisional Order for amending certain Local Acts.

South Chilterns Joint Smallpox Hospital Order 1925

Provisional Order for altering two Provisional Orders confirmed by Parliament.

West Hartlepool Order 1925

Provisional Order for partially repealing and amending certain Local and Confirmation Acts.

Weymouth and Melcombe Regis Order 1925

Provisional Order for partially repealing altering or amending the Weymouth and Melcombe Regis Corporation Act 1914.

Ministry of Health Provisional Orders Confirmation (Water) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxvi

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Minister of Health relating to Bull Bay Water Higham and Hundred of Hoo Water and Monks and Princes Risborough Water.

Bull Bay Water Order 1925

Provisional Order under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870

and the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870 Amendment Act 1873

to authorise the construction and maintenance of waterworks and the supply of water in part of the Urban District of Amlwch in the County of Anglesey.

Higham and Hundred of Hoo Water Order 1925

Provisional Order under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870

and the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870 Amendment Act 1873

empowering the Higham and Hundred of Hoo Water Company to construct and maintain additional waterworks to raise additional capital and for other purposes.

Monks and Princes Risborough Water Order 1925

Provisional Order under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870

and the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870 Amendment Act 1873

for empowering the Rural Districts Water Company Limited to construct and maintain waterworks and to supply water in parts of the Rural District of Wycombe in the County of Buckinghaт.

West Hartlepool Corporation (Trolley Vehicles) Order Confirmation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxvii

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order made by the Minister of Transport under the West Hartlepool Corporation Act 1923

relating to West Hartlepool Corporation trolley vehicles.

(Repealed by

County of Cleveland Act 1987

(c. ix))

West Hartlepool Corporation (Trolley Vehicles) Order 1925

Order authorising the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of West Hartlepool to use trolley vehicles upon routes in the borough of Hartlepool.

Irvine Burgh Order Confirmation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxviii

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to Irvine Burgh.

Irvine Burgh Order 1925

Provisional Order to extend the powers of the provost magistrates and councillors of the royal burgh of Irvine under the Burial Grounds (Scotland) Acts to the whole of the burgh to make provision with regard to the common good of the burgh and for other purposes.

Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow Act 1888 (Amendment) Order Confirmation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. lxxxix

7 August 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to the Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow.

Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow Act 1888 (Amendment) Order 1925

Provisional Order to confer further powers on the Governors of the Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow to amend the provisions of the Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow Act 1888

as modified by the Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow Act 1888 (Amendment) Order Confirmation Act 1919 and for other purposes.

Stock Conversion and Investment Trust Limited Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xc

7 August 1925

An Act to alter the provisions of certain trust deeds regulating the issue of preferred and deferred stocks in respect of certain railway ordinary stocks to confer further powers upon the trustees of those trust deeds and upon the Stock Conversion and Investment Trust Limited and the Railway Investment Company Limited and upon certain trustees of the Railway Investment Company Limited and for other purposes.

Hoylake and West Kirby Urban District Council Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xci

7 August 1925

An Act to provide for the transfer of the undertaking of the Hoylake and West Kirby Gas and Water Company to the urban district council of Hoylake and West Kirby to authorise the Council to supply gas and water in and in the neighbourhood of their district and for other purposes.

Burnley Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcii

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the Corporation of Burnley to construct street works waterworks and tramways to confer further powers upon the Corporation as to the running of omnibuses and in regard to their tramways water gas and electricity undertakings and the health local government and improvement of the borough to alter the boundary of the borough and to provide for the consolidation of the rates thereof and for other purposes.

Bath Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xciii

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the mayor aldermen and citizens of the city of Bath to execute street works and to acquire certain toll bridges to confer further powers upon them in regard to their water and electricity undertakings to provide for the consolidation of the rates of the city to make further provision with regard to the health local government and improvement of the city and for other purposes.

Middlesex County Council Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xciv

7 August 1925

An Act to confer further powers upon the Middlesex County Council and the Metropolitan Electric Tramways Limited in reference to their light railways and tramways and to make further provision in regard to those light railways and tramways to empower the said Council to construct street improvements and tramways to make further provision in reference to roads in the county of Middlesex and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Middlesex County Council Act 1944

(

7 & 8 Geo. 6

. c. xxi))

Slough Trading Company Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcv

7 August 1925

An Act for providing for the regulation of certain roads on the Slough Trading Estate and for other purposes.

Stockton-on-Tees Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcvi

7 August 1925

An Act to provide for the purchase of the undertaking and business of the Haverton Hill-on-Tees Gas Company Limited by the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Stockton-on-Tees to extend the areas of supply for gas and electricity of the Stockton-on-Tees Corporation to confer further powers on the Corporation with regard to the supply of gas and electricity and the consolidation of rates and for other purposes.

Oldham Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcvii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the county borough of Oldham to execute street improvements to confer further powers upon them in connection with their several undertakings to consolidate with amendments the local legislation relating to their tramways undertaking to make better provision for the health local government and finance of the borough and the levying of rates therein and for other purposes.

Mansfield Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcviii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Mansfield to execute street improvements to make further provision in regard to the water gas and electricity undertakings of the Corporation and for the health local government and improvement of the borough to consolidate the rates of the borough and for other purposes.

Mid-Glamorgan Water Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. xcix

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the Mid-Glamorgan Water Board to construct further waterworks to confirm existing works and for other purposes.

Newbury Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. c

7 August 1925

An Act to provide for the transfer of the undertaking of the Newbury District Water Company Limited to the Newbury Corporation to authorise the Corporation to supply water in and in the neighbourhood of their borough to make further provision with regard to the improvement of the borough and the consolidation of rates and for other purposes.

London, Midland and Scottish Railway Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. ci

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the London Midland and Scottish Railway Company to construct railways and works and to acquire lands and for other purposes.

Blackpool Improvement Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cii

7 August 1925

An Act to confer further powers upon the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Blackpool for the construction of street improvements and tramways and the running of omnibuses to enlarge their powers in regard to their tramway gas and electricity undertakings and to make further provision with respect to the health local government and improvement of the borough and for other purposes.

Ipswich Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. ciii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Ipswich to provide and work trolley vehicles to make further provision with regard to the health local government and improvement of the borough and for other purposes.

Leek Urban District Council Water Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. civ

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the urban district council of Leek to construct waterworks to make further provision with regard to their water undertaking and for other purposes.

Scarborough Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cv

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the Corporation of Scarborough to construct street improvements and to provide and work lifts on the cliffs of the borough to make further provision with regard to public gardens pleasure grounds and other lands in the borough and the neighbourhood thereof to make further and better provision for the improvement health and good government of the borough to provide for the consolidation of the rates of the borough and for other purposes.

Colonial Bank Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cvi

7 August 1925

An Act to provide a new constitution for The Colonial Bank and to re-incorporate the same to reorganise its capital to confer further powers on The Colonial Bank to repeal existing Charters and Acts and for further purposes.

Barrow-in-Furness Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cvii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Barrow-in-Furness to provide and work omnibuses and trolley vehicles to make further provision with regard to the tramways gas electricity markets and other undertakings of the Corporation to make provision for altering the number of councillors and aldermen to consolidate the rates of the borough and to make further provision with regard to the health local government and improvement thereof and for other purposes.

Uckfield Gas and Electricity Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cviii

7 August 1925

An Act for incorporating and conferring powers on the Uckfield Gas and Electricity Company.

Nottingham Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cix

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the mayor aldermen and citizens of the city of Nottingham and county of the same city to construct street works a railway and tramways to provide and work trolley vehicles on further routes to extend the Corporation's water limits to provide for the establishment of a yarn and textile testing bureau by University College Nottingham to confer further powers on the Corporation with regard to the good government of the city and for other purposes.

Mersey Tunnel Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cx

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the construction of a tunnel under the River Mersey between Liverpool and Birkenhead and for other purposes.

Boothferry Bridge Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxi

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the county council of the West Riding of Yorkshire to construct a new bridge over the River Ouse to provide for contributions thereto by the county council of the East Riding of Yorkshire the lord mayor aldermen and citizens of the city and county of Kingston upon Hull and the Goole Urban District Council and for the vesting of the said bridge in the said county councils and for other purposes.

West Ham Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxii

7 August 1925

An Act to authorise the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the county borough of West Ham to acquire lands to confer upon them powers with reference to their tramway and electricity undertakings and for other purposes.

West Cheshire Water Board Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxiii

7 August 1925

An Act to constitute the West Cheshire Water Board to transfer to them the undertaking of the West Cheshire Water Company and certain works of the Wirral Waterworks Company and for other purposes.

Clydebank Burgh Extension Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxiv

7 August 1925

An Act to extend the boundaries of the burgh of Clydebank and for other purposes.

Surrey County Council Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxv

7 August 1925

An Act to make provision for preventing pollution and obstruction of certain streams and securing proper land drainage in the county of Surrey to confer on the Surrey County Council further powers for those purposes and for the better government and administration of the county in relation to maternity homes employment agencies places of public entertainment and the manufacture and sale of ice-cream and with respect to main and arterial roads to authorise the Council to establish fire and employers liability insurance funds and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Surrey Act 1985

(c. iii))

Darlington Corporation (Transport, &c.) Act 1925

or the

Darlington Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxvi

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the county borough of Darlington to substitute trolley vehicles and omnibuses for their light railways and for other purposes.

New Shoreham Harbour Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxvii

7 August 1925

An Act to alter and increase the rates tolls and dues leviable by the Shoreham Harbour Trustees to authorise them to acquire lands and for other purposes.

Hartlepool Corporation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxviii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Hartlepool to run omnibuses to make further provision for the health local government and improvement of the borough to consolidate the rates of the borough and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

County of Cleveland Act 1987

(c. ix))

London County Council (General Powers) Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxix

7 August 1925

An Act to confer further powers upon the London County Council and the metropolitan borough councils to make provision with respect to the admission into the London main drainage system of sewage and drainage from the urban districts of Walthamstow and Leyton and for other purposes.

Manchester Ship Canal Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxx

7 August 1925

An Act to confer further powers on the Manchester Ship Canal Company and for other purposes.

Bradford Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxi

7 August 1925

An Act to enable the lord mayor aldermen and citizens of the city of Bradford to construct waterworks and acquire lands to authorise them to run omnibuses to make further provisions for the health improvement and good government of the city and for other purposes.

Walsall Corporation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Walsall to provide and work trolley vehicles on further routes to empower them to purchase lands for various purposes and to confer further powers with regard to the improvement of the borough and the consolidation of rates and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Walsall Corporation Act 1969

(c. lviii))

Wolverhampton Corporation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxiii

7 August 1925

An Act to empower the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Wolverhampton to provide and work trolley vehicles and to confer further powers upon them with regard to the provision and working of omnibuses to empower the Corporation to construct street improvements to make further provision with regard to the tramway omnibus and electricity undertakings of the Corporation and the health local government and improvement of the borough to amend the law with regard to the making assessment and collection of rates in the borough and the Wolverhampton Poor Law Union and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Wolverhampton Corporation Act 1969

(c. lx))

Bexhill Corporation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxiv

10 December 1925

An Act to provide for the transfer of the undertaking of the Bexhill Water and Gas Company to the Bexhill Corporation to authorise the Corporation to supply water and gas in and in the neighbourhood of their borough to make further provision with regard to the health improvement and good government of the borough and the consolidation of rates and for other purposes.

Leith Harbour and Docks Order Confirmation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxv

10 December 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to Leith Harbour and Docks.

(Repealed by

Statute Law (Repeals) Act 1986

(c. 12))

Leith Harbour and Docks Order 1925

Provisional Order to authorise The Commissioners for the Harbour and Docks of Leith to construct new works and for other purposes.

Campbeltown Harbour and Gas Order Confirmation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxvi

10 December 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to Campbeltown Harbour and Gas.

Campbeltown Harbour and Gas Order 1925

Provisional Order to make provision as to the statutory tolls rates duties and charges leviable at the Harbour of Campbeltown and to authorise the Provost Magistrates and Councillors of the Royal Burgh of Campbeltown to borrow further moneys for the general purposes of their Gas Undertaking and for other purposes.

Sandwich Port and Haven Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxvii

22 December 1925

An Act to provide for the conservancy, regulation, management and improvement of the Port and Haven of Sandwich, and for purposes connected therewith.

Ministry of Health Provisional Order Confirmation (Bournemouth Order) Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxviii

22 December 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order of the Minister of Health relating to Bournemouth.

(Repealed by

Bournemouth Borough Council Act 1985

(c. v))

Bournemouth (Compulsory Purchase of Lands) Order 1925

Provisional Order to enable the Bournemouth Corporation to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Acts.

Aberdeen Corporation Order Confirmation Act 1925

(repealed)

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxix

22 December 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to Aberdeen Corporation.

(Repealed by

Aberdeen Corporation (Administration Finance, &c.) Order Confirmation Act 1940

(

3 & 4 Geo. 6

. c. iii))

Aberdeen Corporation Order 1925

Provisional Order to authorise the corporation of the city and royal burgh of Aberdeen to use part of the links for entertainment buildings to make further provision with respect to the esplanade to borrow further moneys and to make provision for other purposes.

Baldovan Institute for the Treatment and Education of Defectives Order Confirmation Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxx

22 December 1925

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899

relating to Baldovan Institute for the Treatment and Education of Defectives.

Baldovan Institute for the Treatment and Education of Defectives Order 1925

Provisional Order to incorporate a body for the maintenance and management of the Baldovan Institute for the treatment and education of defectives and for other purposes.

Glasgow Boundaries Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxxi

22 December 1925

An Act to extend the boundaries of the city and royal burgh of Glasgow and of the county of the city of Glasgow and to alter and adjust the boundaries of the counties of Lanark Renfrew and Dunbarton and for other purposes.

Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire Electricity Act 1925

15 & 16 Geo. 5. c. cxxxii

22 December 1925

An Act for incorporating and conferring powers upon the Bedfordshire Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire Electricity Company and for other purposes.

1. Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1899 (62 & 63 Vict. c. 47)
2. Refuge for the Destitute Act 1838 (1 & 2 Vict. c. lxxi)
3. Bradford Corporation Act 1910 (10 Edw. 7 & 1 Geo. 5. c. cxvii)
4. Although passed in 1925, the short title is specified as the Blackpool Order (No. 2) 1924.
5. Advocates' Widows' Fund Act 1830 (11 Geo. 4 & 1 Will. 4. c. xli)
6. Water Undertakings (Modification of Charges) Act 1921 (11 & 12 Geо. 5. с. 44)
7. Local Government Act 1888 (51 & 52 Vict. c. 41)
8. Northampton Corporation Act 1882 (45 & 46 Vict. c. ccxii)
9. Penrith Urban District Council Act 1907 (7 Edw. 7. c. lxxxviii)
10. South Molton Markets and Improvement Act 1862 (25 & 26 Vict. c. xxvii)
11. Tredegar Urban District Council Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5. c. lxxix)
12. Port of London (Consolidation) Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5. c. clxxiii)
13. South Wales Electrical Power Distribution Company Act 1900 (63 & 64 Vict. c. cclxxxii)
14. Lloyd's Act 1871 (34 & 35 Vict. c. xxi)
15. Abertillery and District Water Board Act 1910 (10 Edw. 7 & 1 Geo. 5. c. cxxv)
16. Barnoldswick Urban District Council Water Act 1915 (5 & 6 Geo. 5. c. lxv)
17. Llanelly Corporation Water Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5. c. cxliii)
18. Nuneaton Corporation Act 1921 (11 & 12 Geo. 5. c. xci)
19. Paignton Improvement Act 1898 (61 & 62 Vict. c. cclvii)
20. Weston-super-Mare Improvement Act 1887 (50 & 51 Vict. c. cvii)
21. Weston-super-Mare Urban District Council Act 1914 (4 & 5 Geo. 5. c. clxvi)
22. Burgh Police (Scotland) Act 1892 (55 & 56 Vict. c. 55)
23. Provisional Order (Marriages) Act 1905 (5 Edw. 7. c. 23)
24. Marriages Validity (Provisional Orders) Act 1924 (14 & 15 Geo. 5. c. 20)
25. George Leveson-Gower, 1st Duke of Sutherland.
26. Name changed from "Commissioners for the harbour of Poole" to "Poole Harbour Commissioners".
27. Charitable Trusts Act 1853 (16 & 17 Vict. c. 137)
28. Land Drainage Act 1918 (8 & 9 Geo. 5. c. 17)
29. Land Drainage Act 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 133)
30. Land Drainage (Ouse) Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5. c. cxxii)
31. General Pier and Harbour Act 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 45)
32. Tramways Act 1870 (33 & 34 Vict. c. 78)
33. Police Pensions Act 1921 (11 & 12 Geo. 5. c. 31)
34. Leicester Corporation Act 1908 (8 Edw. 7. c. lvi)
35. Public Health Act 1875 (38 & 39 Vict. c. 55)
36. Salford Corporation Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5. c. cxlviii)
37. Brighthelmston Improvement and Poor Relief Act 1825 (6 Geo. 4. c. clxxix)
38. Colwyn Bay and Colwyn Urban District Council Act 1902 (2 Edw. 7. c. clxxv)
39. Mitcham Urban District Council Act 1923 (13 & 14 Geo. 5. c. lxviii)
40. Newton District Improvement Act 1855 (18 & 19 Vict. c. c)
41. Stoke-on-Trent Corporation Act 1923 (13 & 14 Geo. 5. c. cvii)
42. Harrogate Improvement Act 1841 (4 & 5 Vict. c. xvi)
43. Harrogate Corporation Act 1893 (56 & 57 Vict. c. ccix)
44. Local Government (No. 6) Act 1868 (31 & 32 Vict. c. cliii)
45. Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Act 1906 (6 Edw. 7. c. ciii)
46. Liverpool Corporation Act 1921 (11 & 12 Geo. 5. c. lxxiv)
47. Newcastle-upon-Tyne Corporation Act 1904 (4 Edw. 7. c. ccxx)
48. Newport (Isle of Wight) Borough Act 1876 (39 & 40 Vict. c. lxi)
49. Swindon Corporation (Wilts and Berks Canal Abandonment) Act 1914 (4 & 5 Geo. 5. c. cviii)
50. Birstal Local Board Act 1872 (35 & 36 Vict. c. lxxiii)
51. Bournemouth Corporation Act 1904 (4 Edw. 7. c. cliii)
52. Huddersfield Corporation Act 1906 (6 Edw. 7. c. lxxxiv)
53. Worcester Markets and Drainage Act 1837 (7 Will. 4 & 1 Vict. c. lviii)
54. Worcester Extension Act 1885 (48 & 49 Vict. c. clxiv)
55. Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Act 1898 (61 & 62 Vict. c. lxxvii)
56. Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 3) Act 1904 (4 Edw. 7. c. lxiv)
57. Weymouth and Melcombe Regis Corporation Act 1914 (4 & 5 Geo. 5. c. clxxiv)
58. Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870 (33 & 34 Vict. c. 70)
59. Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870 Amendment Act 1873 (36 & 37 Vict. c. 89)
60. West Hartlepool Corporation Act 1923 (13 & 14 Geo. 5. c. xcv)
61. Victoria Infirmary of Glasgow Act 1888 (51 & 52 Vict. c. xxxvi)
