---
title: "Nim Manual (part 2/5)"
source: https://nim-lang.org/docs/manual.html
domain: nim-lang
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: nim language, nim lang, nimble, nim compiler
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/5
---

# This file is generated by compiler/parser.nim.
module = complexOrSimpleStmt ^* (';' / IND{=})
comma = ',' COMMENT?
semicolon = ';' COMMENT?
colon = ':' COMMENT?
colcom = ':' COMMENT?
operator =  OP0 | OP1 | OP2 | OP3 | OP4 | OP5 | OP6 | OP7 | OP8 | OP9
         | 'or' | 'xor' | 'and'
         | 'is' | 'isnot' | 'in' | 'notin' | 'of' | 'as' | 'from'
         | 'div' | 'mod' | 'shl' | 'shr' | 'not' | '..'
prefixOperator = operator
optInd = COMMENT? IND?
optPar = (IND{>} | IND{=})?
simpleExpr = arrowExpr (OP0 optInd arrowExpr)* pragma?
arrowExpr = assignExpr (OP1 optInd assignExpr)*
assignExpr = orExpr (OP2 optInd orExpr)*
orExpr = andExpr (OP3 optInd andExpr)*
andExpr = cmpExpr (OP4 optInd cmpExpr)*
cmpExpr = sliceExpr (OP5 optInd sliceExpr)*
sliceExpr = ampExpr (OP6 optInd ampExpr)*
ampExpr = plusExpr (OP7 optInd plusExpr)*
plusExpr = mulExpr (OP8 optInd mulExpr)*
mulExpr = dollarExpr (OP9 optInd dollarExpr)*
dollarExpr = primary (OP10 optInd primary)*
operatorB = OP0 | OP1 | OP2 | OP3 | OP4 | OP5 | OP6 | OP7 | OP8 | OP9 |
            'div' | 'mod' | 'shl' | 'shr' | 'in' | 'notin' |
            'is' | 'isnot' | 'not' | 'of' | 'as' | 'from' | '..' | 'and' | 'or' | 'xor'
symbol = '`' (KEYW|IDENT|literal|(operator|'('|')'|'['|']'|'{'|'}'|'=')+)+ '`'
       | IDENT | 'addr' | 'type' | 'static'
symbolOrKeyword = symbol | KEYW
exprColonEqExpr = expr ((':'|'=') expr
                       / doBlock extraPostExprBlock*)?
exprEqExpr = expr ('=' expr
                  / doBlock extraPostExprBlock*)?
exprList = expr ^+ comma
optionalExprList = expr ^* comma
exprColonEqExprList = exprColonEqExpr (comma exprColonEqExpr)* (comma)?
qualifiedIdent = symbol ('.' optInd symbolOrKeyword)?
setOrTableConstr = '{' ((exprColonEqExpr comma)* | ':' ) '}'
castExpr = 'cast' ('[' optInd typeDesc optPar ']' '(' optInd expr optPar ')') /
parKeyw = 'discard' | 'include' | 'if' | 'while' | 'case' | 'try'
        | 'finally' | 'except' | 'for' | 'block' | 'const' | 'let'
        | 'when' | 'var' | 'mixin'
par = '(' optInd
          ( &parKeyw (ifExpr / complexOrSimpleStmt) ^+ ';'
          | ';' (ifExpr / complexOrSimpleStmt) ^+ ';'
          | pragmaStmt
          | simpleExpr ( (doBlock extraPostExprBlock*)
                       | ('=' expr (';' (ifExpr / complexOrSimpleStmt) ^+ ';' )? )
                       | (':' expr (',' exprColonEqExpr     ^+ ',' )? ) ) )
          optPar ')'
literal = | INT_LIT | INT8_LIT | INT16_LIT | INT32_LIT | INT64_LIT
          | UINT_LIT | UINT8_LIT | UINT16_LIT | UINT32_LIT | UINT64_LIT
          | FLOAT_LIT | FLOAT32_LIT | FLOAT64_LIT
          | STR_LIT | RSTR_LIT | TRIPLESTR_LIT
          | CHAR_LIT | CUSTOM_NUMERIC_LIT
          | NIL
generalizedLit = GENERALIZED_STR_LIT | GENERALIZED_TRIPLESTR_LIT
identOrLiteral = generalizedLit | symbol | literal
               | par | arrayConstr | setOrTableConstr | tupleConstr
               | castExpr
tupleConstr = '(' optInd (exprColonEqExpr comma?)* optPar ')'
arrayConstr = '[' optInd (exprColonEqExpr comma?)* optPar ']'
primarySuffix = '(' (exprColonEqExpr comma?)* ')'
      | '.' optInd symbolOrKeyword ('[:' exprList ']' ( '(' exprColonEqExpr ')' )?)? generalizedLit?
      | DOTLIKEOP optInd symbolOrKeyword generalizedLit?
      | '[' optInd exprColonEqExprList optPar ']'
      | '{' optInd exprColonEqExprList optPar '}'
pragma = '{.' optInd (exprColonEqExpr comma?)* optPar ('.}' | '}')
identVis = symbol OPR?  # postfix position
identVisDot = symbol '.' optInd symbolOrKeyword OPR?
identWithPragma = identVis pragma?
identWithPragmaDot = identVisDot pragma?
declColonEquals = identWithPragma (comma identWithPragma)* comma?
                  (':' optInd typeDescExpr)? ('=' optInd expr)?
identColonEquals = IDENT (comma IDENT)* comma?
     (':' optInd typeDescExpr)? ('=' optInd expr)?)
tupleTypeBracket = '[' optInd (identColonEquals (comma/semicolon)?)* optPar ']'
tupleType = 'tuple' tupleTypeBracket
tupleDecl = 'tuple' (tupleTypeBracket /
    COMMENT? (IND{>} identColonEquals (IND{=} identColonEquals)*)?)
paramList = '(' declColonEquals ^* (comma/semicolon) ')'
paramListArrow = paramList? ('->' optInd typeDesc)?
paramListColon = paramList? (':' optInd typeDesc)?
doBlock = 'do' paramListArrow pragma? colcom stmt
routineExpr = ('proc' | 'func' | 'iterator') paramListColon pragma? ('=' COMMENT? stmt)?
routineType = ('proc' | 'iterator') paramListColon pragma?
forStmt = 'for' ((varTuple / identWithPragma) ^+ comma) 'in' expr colcom stmt
forExpr = forStmt
expr = (blockExpr
      | ifExpr
      | whenExpr
      | caseStmt
      | forExpr
      | tryExpr)
      / simpleExpr
simplePrimary = SIGILLIKEOP? identOrLiteral primarySuffix*
commandStart = &('`'|IDENT|literal|'cast'|'addr'|'type'|'var'|'out'|
                 'static'|'enum'|'tuple'|'object'|'proc')
primary = simplePrimary (commandStart expr (doBlock extraPostExprBlock*)?)?
        / operatorB primary
        / routineExpr
        / rawTypeDesc
        / prefixOperator primary
rawTypeDesc = (tupleType | routineType | 'enum' | 'object' |
                ('var' | 'out' | 'ref' | 'ptr' | 'distinct') typeDesc?)
                ('not' primary)?
typeDescExpr = (routineType / simpleExpr) ('not' primary)?
typeDesc = rawTypeDesc / typeDescExpr
typeDefValue = ((tupleDecl | enumDecl | objectDecl | conceptDecl |
                 ('ref' | 'ptr' | 'distinct') (tupleDecl | objectDecl))
               / (simpleExpr (exprEqExpr ^+ comma postExprBlocks?)?))
               ('not' primary)?
extraPostExprBlock = ( IND{=} doBlock
                     | IND{=} 'of' exprList ':' stmt
                     | IND{=} 'elif' expr ':' stmt
                     | IND{=} 'except' optionalExprList ':' stmt
                     | IND{=} 'finally' ':' stmt
                     | IND{=} 'else' ':' stmt )
postExprBlocks = (doBlock / ':' (extraPostExprBlock / stmt)) extraPostExprBlock*
exprStmt = simpleExpr postExprBlocks?
         / simplePrimary (exprEqExpr ^+ comma) postExprBlocks?
         / simpleExpr '=' optInd (expr postExprBlocks?)
importStmt = 'import' optInd expr
              ((comma expr)*
              / 'except' optInd (expr ^+ comma))
exportStmt = 'export' optInd expr
              ((comma expr)*
              / 'except' optInd (expr ^+ comma))
includeStmt = 'include' optInd expr ^+ comma
fromStmt = 'from' expr 'import' optInd expr (comma expr)*
returnStmt = 'return' optInd expr?
raiseStmt = 'raise' optInd expr?
yieldStmt = 'yield' optInd expr?
discardStmt = 'discard' optInd expr?
breakStmt = 'break' optInd expr?
continueStmt = 'continue' optInd expr?
condStmt = expr colcom stmt COMMENT?
           (IND{=} 'elif' expr colcom stmt)*
           (IND{=} 'else' colcom stmt)?
ifStmt = 'if' condStmt
whenStmt = 'when' condStmt
condExpr = expr colcom stmt optInd
        ('elif' expr colcom stmt optInd)*
         'else' colcom stmt
ifExpr = 'if' condExpr
whenExpr = 'when' condExpr
whileStmt = 'while' expr colcom stmt
ofBranch = 'of' exprList colcom stmt
ofBranches = ofBranch (IND{=} ofBranch)*
                      (IND{=} 'elif' expr colcom stmt)*
                      (IND{=} 'else' colcom stmt)?
caseStmt = 'case' expr ':'? COMMENT?
            (IND{>} ofBranches DED
            | IND{=} ofBranches)
tryStmt = 'try' colcom stmt &(IND{=}? 'except'|'finally')
           (IND{=}? 'except' optionalExprList colcom stmt)*
           (IND{=}? 'finally' colcom stmt)?
tryExpr = 'try' colcom stmt &(optInd 'except'|'finally')
           (optInd 'except' optionalExprList colcom stmt)*
           (optInd 'finally' colcom stmt)?
blockStmt = 'block' symbol? colcom stmt
blockExpr = 'block' symbol? colcom stmt
staticStmt = 'static' colcom stmt
deferStmt = 'defer' colcom stmt
asmStmt = 'asm' pragma? (STR_LIT | RSTR_LIT | TRIPLESTR_LIT)
genericParam = symbol (comma symbol)* (colon expr)? ('=' optInd expr)?
genericParamList = '[' optInd
  genericParam ^* (comma/semicolon) optPar ']'
pattern = '{' stmt '}'
indAndComment = (IND{>} COMMENT)? | COMMENT?
routine = optInd identVis pattern? genericParamList?
  paramListColon pragma? ('=' COMMENT? stmt)? indAndComment
commentStmt = COMMENT
section(RULE) = COMMENT? RULE / (IND{>} (RULE / COMMENT)^+IND{=} DED)
enumDecl = 'enum' optInd (symbol pragma? optInd ('=' optInd expr COMMENT?)? comma?)+
objectWhen = 'when' expr colcom objectPart COMMENT?
            ('elif' expr colcom objectPart COMMENT?)*
            ('else' colcom objectPart COMMENT?)?
objectBranch = 'of' exprList colcom objectPart
objectBranches = objectBranch (IND{=} objectBranch)*
                      (IND{=} 'elif' expr colcom objectPart)*
                      (IND{=} 'else' colcom objectPart)?
objectCase = 'case' (declColonEquals / pragma)? ':'? COMMENT?
            (IND{>} objectBranches DED
            | IND{=} objectBranches)
objectPart = IND{>} objectPart^+IND{=} DED
           / objectWhen / objectCase / 'nil' / 'discard' / declColonEquals
objectDecl = 'object' ('of' typeDesc)? COMMENT? objectPart
conceptParam = ('var' | 'out' | 'ptr' | 'ref' | 'static' | 'type')? symbol
conceptDecl = 'concept' conceptParam ^* ',' (pragma)? ('of' typeDesc ^* ',')?
              &IND{>} stmt
typeDef = identVisDot genericParamList? pragma '=' optInd typeDefValue
            indAndComment?
varTupleLhs = '(' optInd (identWithPragma / varTupleLhs) ^+ comma optPar ')' (':' optInd typeDescExpr)?
varTuple = varTupleLhs '=' optInd expr
colonBody = colcom stmt postExprBlocks?
variable = (varTuple / identColonEquals) colonBody? indAndComment
constant = (varTuple / identWithPragma) (colon typeDesc)? '=' optInd expr indAndComment
bindStmt = 'bind' optInd qualifiedIdent ^+ comma
mixinStmt = 'mixin' optInd qualifiedIdent ^+ comma
pragmaStmt = pragma (':' COMMENT? stmt)?
simpleStmt = ((returnStmt | raiseStmt | yieldStmt | discardStmt | breakStmt
           | continueStmt | pragmaStmt | importStmt | exportStmt | fromStmt
           | includeStmt | commentStmt) / exprStmt) COMMENT?
complexOrSimpleStmt = (ifStmt | whenStmt | whileStmt
                    | tryStmt | forStmt
                    | blockStmt | staticStmt | deferStmt | asmStmt
                    | 'proc' routine
                    | 'method' routine
                    | 'func' routine
                    | 'iterator' routine
                    | 'macro' routine
                    | 'template' routine
                    | 'converter' routine
                    | 'type' section(typeDef)
                    | 'const' section(constant)
                    | ('let' | 'var' | 'using') section(variable)
                    | bindStmt | mixinStmt)
                    / simpleStmt
stmt = (IND{>} complexOrSimpleStmt^+(IND{=} / ';') DED)
     / simpleStmt ^+ ';'
```

Order of evaluation is strictly left-to-right, inside-out as it is typical for most others imperative programming languages:

var s = "" proc p(arg: int): int = s.add $arg result = arg discard p(p(1) + p(2)) doAssert s == "123"

Assignments are not special, the left-hand-side expression is evaluated before the right-hand side:

var v = 0 proc getI(): int = result = v inc v var a, b: array[0..2, int] proc someCopy(a: var int; b: int) = a = b a[getI()] = getI() doAssert a == [1, 0, 0] v = 0 someCopy(b[getI()], getI()) doAssert b == [1, 0, 0]

Rationale: Consistency with overloaded assignment or assignment-like operations, a = b can be read as performSomeCopy(a, b).

However, the concept of "order of evaluation" is only applicable after the code was normalized: The normalization involves template expansions and argument reorderings that have been passed to named parameters:

var s = "" proc p(): int = s.add "p" result = 5 proc q(): int = s.add "q" result = 3 template swapArgs(a, b): untyped = b + a doAssert swapArgs(p() + q(), q() - p()) == 6 doAssert s == "qppq" proc construct(first, second: int) = discard construct(second = q(), first = p()) doAssert s == "qppqpq"

Rationale: This is far easier to implement than hypothetical alternatives.

A constant is a symbol that is bound to the value of a constant expression. Constant expressions are restricted to depend only on the following categories of values and operations, because these are either built into the language or declared and evaluated before semantic analysis of the constant expression:

- literals
- built-in operators
- previously declared constants and compile-time variables
- previously declared macros and templates
- previously declared procedures that have no side effects beyond possibly modifying compile-time variables

A constant expression can contain code blocks that may internally use all Nim features supported at compile time (as detailed in the next section below). Within such a code block, it is possible to declare variables and then later read and update them, or declare variables and pass them to procedures that modify them. However, the code in such a block must still adhere to the restrictions listed above for referencing values and operations outside the block.

The ability to access and modify compile-time variables adds flexibility to constant expressions that may be surprising to those coming from other statically typed languages. For example, the following code echoes the beginning of the Fibonacci series **at compile-time**. (This is a demonstration of flexibility in defining constants, not a recommended style for solving this problem.)

import std/strformat var fibN {.compileTime.}: int var fibPrev {.compileTime.}: int var fibPrevPrev {.compileTime.}: int proc nextFib(): int = result = if fibN < 2: fibN else: fibPrevPrev + fibPrev inc(fibN) fibPrevPrev = fibPrev fibPrev = result const f0 = nextFib() const f1 = nextFib() const displayFib = block: const f2 = nextFib() var result = fmt"Fibonacci sequence: {f0}, {f1}, {f2}" for i in 3..12: add(result, fmt", {nextFib()}") result static: echo displayFib

Nim code that will be executed at compile time cannot use the following language features:

- methods
- closure iterators
- the cast operator
- reference (pointer) types
- FFI

The use of wrappers that use FFI and/or cast is also disallowed. Note that these wrappers include the ones in the standard libraries.

Some or all of these restrictions are likely to be lifted over time.

All expressions have a type that is known during semantic analysis. Nim is statically typed. One can declare new types, which is in essence defining an identifier that can be used to denote this custom type.

These are the major type classes:

- ordinal types (consist of integer, bool, character, enumeration (and subranges thereof) types)
- floating-point types
- string type
- structured types
- reference (pointer) type
- procedural type
- generic type

Ordinal types have the following characteristics:

- Ordinal types are countable and ordered. This property allows the operation of functions such as inc, ord, and dec on ordinal types to be defined.
- Ordinal types have a smallest possible value, accessible with low(type). Trying to count further down than the smallest value produces a panic or a static error.
- Ordinal types have a largest possible value, accessible with high(type). Trying to count further up than the largest value produces a panic or a static error.

Integers, bool, characters, and enumeration types (and subranges of these types) belong to ordinal types.

A distinct type is an ordinal type if its base type is an ordinal type.

These integer types are pre-defined:

**int**

the generic signed integer type; its size is platform-dependent and has the same size as a pointer. This type should be used in general. An integer literal that has no type suffix is of this type if it is in the range

low

(

int32

)

..

high

(

int32

)

otherwise the literal's type is

int64

.

**intXX**

additional signed integer types of XX bits use this naming scheme (example: int16 is a 16-bit wide integer). The current implementation supports

int8

,

int16

,

int32

,

int64

. Literals of these types have the suffix 'iXX.

**uint**

the generic

unsigned integer

type; its size is platform-dependent and has the same size as a pointer. An integer literal with the type suffix

'u

is of this type.

**uintXX**

additional unsigned integer types of XX bits use this naming scheme (example: uint16 is a 16-bit wide unsigned integer). The current implementation supports

uint8

,

uint16

,

uint32

,

uint64

. Literals of these types have the suffix 'uXX. Unsigned operations all wrap around; they cannot lead to over- or underflow errors.

In addition to the usual arithmetic operators for signed and unsigned integers (+ - * etc.) there are also operators that formally work on *signed* integers but treat their arguments as *unsigned*: They are mostly provided for backwards compatibility with older versions of the language that lacked unsigned integer types. These unsigned operations for signed integers use the % suffix as convention:

| operation | meaning |
|---|---|
| a +% b | unsigned integer addition |
| a -% b | unsigned integer subtraction |
| a *% b | unsigned integer multiplication |
| a /% b | unsigned integer division |
| a %% b | unsigned integer modulo operation |
| a <% b | treat a and b as unsigned and compare |
| a <=% b | treat a and b as unsigned and compare |

Automatic type conversion is performed in expressions where different kinds of integer types are used: the smaller type is converted to the larger.

A narrowing type conversion converts a larger to a smaller type (for example int32 -> int16). A widening type conversion converts a smaller type to a larger type (for example int16 -> int32). In Nim only widening type conversions are *implicit*:

var myInt16 = 5i16 var myInt: int myInt16 + 34 myInt16 + myInt myInt16 + 2i32

However, int literals are implicitly convertible to a smaller integer type if the literal's value fits this smaller type and such a conversion is less expensive than other implicit conversions, so myInt16 + 34 produces an int16 result.

For further details, see Convertible relation.

A subrange type is a range of values from an ordinal or floating-point type (the base type). To define a subrange type, one must specify its limiting values -- the lowest and highest value of the type. For example:

type Subrange = range[0..5] PositiveFloat = range[0.0..Inf] Positive* = range[1..high(int)]

Subrange is a subrange of an integer which can only hold the values 0 to 5. PositiveFloat defines a subrange of all positive floating-point values. NaN does not belong to any subrange of floating-point types. Assigning any other value to a variable of type Subrange is a panic (or a static error if it can be determined during semantic analysis). Assignments from the base type to one of its subrange types (and vice versa) are allowed.

A subrange type has the same size as its base type (int in the Subrange example).

Implicit "downsizing" conversions to range types (for example, int -> range[0..255] or range[1..256] -> range[0..255]) emit the ImplicitRangeConversion warning. Conversions that are clearly safe (for example, range[0..255] -> range[0..65535]) and any explicit casts do not trigger this warning. Conversions from int to common subranges such as Natural or Positive do not trigger this warning by default, but can be enabled with --warning:systemRangeConversion.

The following floating-point types are pre-defined:

**float**

the generic floating-point type; its size used to be platform-dependent, but now it is always mapped to

float64

. This type should be used in general.

**floatXX**

an implementation may define additional floating-point types of XX bits using this naming scheme (example:

float64

is a 64-bit wide float). The current implementation supports

float32

and

float64

. Literals of these types have the suffix 'fXX.

Automatic type conversion in expressions with different kinds of floating-point types is performed: See Convertible relation for further details. Arithmetic performed on floating-point types follows the IEEE standard. Integer types are not converted to floating-point types automatically and vice versa.

The IEEE standard defines five types of floating-point exceptions:

- Invalid: operations with mathematically invalid operands, for example 0.0/0.0, sqrt(-1.0), and log(-37.8).
- Division by zero: divisor is zero and dividend is a finite nonzero number, for example 1.0/0.0.
- Overflow: operation produces a result that exceeds the range of the exponent, for example MAXDOUBLE+0.0000000000001e308.
- Underflow: operation produces a result that is too small to be represented as a normal number, for example, MINDOUBLE * MINDOUBLE.
- Inexact: operation produces a result that cannot be represented with infinite precision, for example, 2.0 / 3.0, log(1.1) and 0.1 in input.

The IEEE exceptions are either ignored during execution or mapped to the Nim exceptions: FloatInvalidOpDefect, FloatDivByZeroDefect, FloatOverflowDefect, FloatUnderflowDefect, and FloatInexactDefect. These exceptions inherit from the FloatingPointDefect base class.

Nim provides the pragmas nanChecks and infChecks to control whether the IEEE exceptions are ignored or trap a Nim exception:

{.nanChecks: on, infChecks: on.} var a = 1.0 var b = 0.0 echo b / b echo a / b

In the current implementation FloatDivByZeroDefect and FloatInexactDefect are never raised. FloatOverflowDefect is raised instead of FloatDivByZeroDefect. There is also a floatChecks pragma that is a short-cut for the combination of nanChecks and infChecks pragmas. floatChecks are turned off as default.

The only operations that are affected by the floatChecks pragma are the +, -, *, / operators for floating-point types.

An implementation should always use the maximum precision available to evaluate floating-point values during semantic analysis; this means expressions like 0.09'f32 + 0.01'f32 == 0.09'f64 + 0.01'f64 that are evaluating during constant folding are true.

The boolean type is named bool in Nim and can be one of the two pre-defined values true and false. Conditions in while, if, elif, when-statements need to be of type bool.

This condition holds:

ord(false) == 0 and ord(true) == 1

The operators not, and, or, xor, <, <=, >, >=, !=, == are defined for the bool type. The and and or operators perform short-cut evaluation. Example:

while p != nil and p.name != "xyz": p = p.next

The size of the bool type is one byte.

The character type is named char in Nim. Its size is one byte. Thus, it cannot represent a UTF-8 character, but a part of it.

The Rune type is used for Unicode characters, it can represent any Unicode character. Rune is declared in the unicode module.

Enumeration types define a new type whose values consist of the ones specified. The values are ordered. Example:

type Direction = enum north, east, south, west

Now the following holds:

ord(north) == 0 ord(east) == 1 ord(south) == 2 ord(west) == 3 ord(Direction.west) == 3

The implied order is: north < east < south < west. The comparison operators can be used with enumeration types. Instead of north etc., the enum value can also be qualified with the enum type that it resides in, Direction.north.

For better interfacing to other programming languages, the fields of enum types can be assigned an explicit ordinal value. However, the ordinal values have to be in ascending order. A field whose ordinal value is not explicitly given is assigned the value of the previous field + 1.

An explicit ordered enum can have *holes*:

type TokenType = enum a = 2, b = 4, c = 89

However, it is then not ordinal anymore, so it is impossible to use these enums as an index type for arrays. The procedures inc, dec, succ and pred are not available for them either.

The compiler supports the built-in stringify operator $ for enumerations. The stringify's result can be controlled by explicitly giving the string values to use:

type MyEnum = enum valueA = (0, "my value A"), valueB = "value B", valueC = 2, valueD = (3, "abc")

As can be seen from the example, it is possible to both specify a field's ordinal value and its string value by using a tuple. It is also possible to only specify one of them.

An enum can be marked with the pure pragma so that its fields are added to a special module-specific hidden scope that is only queried as the last attempt. Only non-ambiguous symbols are added to this scope. But one can always access these via type qualification written as MyEnum.value:

type MyEnum {.pure.} = enum valueA, valueB, valueC, valueD, amb OtherEnum {.pure.} = enum valueX, valueY, valueZ, amb echo valueA echo amb echo MyEnum.amb

Enum value names are overloadable, much like routines. If both of the enums T and U have a member named foo, then the identifier foo corresponds to a choice between T.foo and U.foo. During overload resolution, the correct type of foo is decided from the context. If the type of foo is ambiguous, a static error will be produced.

type E1 = enum value1, value2 E2 = enum value1, value2 = 4 const Lookuptable = [ E1.value1: "1", value2: "2" ] proc p(e: E1) = case e of value1: echo "A" of value2: echo "B" p value2

In some cases, ambiguity of enums is resolved depending on the relation between the current scope and the scope the enums were defined in.

type Foo* = enum abc import a type Bar = enum abc echo abc is Bar block: type Baz = enum abc echo abc is Baz

To implement bit fields with enums see Bit fields.

All string literals are of the type string. A string in Nim is very similar to a sequence of characters. However, strings in Nim are both zero-terminated and have a length field. One can retrieve the length with the builtin len procedure; the length never counts the terminating zero.

The terminating zero cannot be accessed unless the string is converted to the cstring type first. The terminating zero assures that this conversion can be done in O(1) and without any allocations.

The assignment operator for strings always copies the string. The & operator concatenates strings.

Most native Nim types support conversion to strings with the special $ proc. When calling the echo proc, for example, the built-in stringify operation for the parameter is called:

echo 3

Whenever a user creates a specialized object, implementation of this procedure provides for string representation.

type Person = object name: string age: int proc `$`(p: Person): string = result = p.name & " is " & $p.age & " years old."

While $p.name can also be used, the $ operation on a string does nothing. Note that we cannot rely on automatic conversion from an int to a string like we can for the echo proc.

Strings are compared by their lexicographical order. All comparison operators are available. Strings can be indexed like arrays (lower bound is 0). Unlike arrays, they can be used in case statements:

case paramStr(i) of "-v": incl(options, optVerbose) of "-h", "-?": incl(options, optHelp) else: write(stdout, "invalid command line option!\n")

Per convention, all strings are UTF-8 strings, but this is not enforced. For example, when reading strings from binary files, they are merely a sequence of bytes. The index operation s[i] means the i-th *char* of s, not the i-th *unichar*. The iterator runes from the unicode module can be used for iteration over all Unicode characters.

The cstring type meaning compatible string is the native representation of a string for the compilation backend. For the C backend the cstring type represents a pointer to a zero-terminated char array compatible with the type char* in ANSI C. Its primary purpose lies in easy interfacing with C. The index operation s[i] means the i-th *char* of s; however no bounds checking for cstring is performed making the index operation unsafe.

A Nim string is implicitly convertible to cstring for convenience. If a Nim string is passed to a C-style variadic proc, it is implicitly converted to cstring too:

proc printf(formatstr: cstring) {.importc: "printf", varargs, header: "<stdio.h>".} printf("This works %s", "as expected")

Even though the conversion is implicit, it is not *safe*: The garbage collector does not consider a cstring to be a root and may collect the underlying memory. For this reason, the implicit conversion will be removed in future releases of the Nim compiler. Certain idioms like conversion of a const string to cstring are safe and will remain to be allowed.

A $ proc is defined for cstrings that returns a string. Thus, to get a nim string from a cstring:

var str: string = "Hello!" var cstr: cstring = str var newstr: string = $cstr

cstring literals shouldn't be modified.

var x = cstring"literals" x[1] = 'A'

If the cstring originates from a regular memory (not read-only memory), it can be modified:

var x = "123456" prepareMutation(x) var s: cstring = cstring(x) s[0] = 'u'

cstring values may also be used in case statements like strings.

A variable of a structured type can hold multiple values at the same time. Structured types can be nested to unlimited levels. Arrays, sequences, tuples, objects, and sets belong to the structured types.

Arrays are a homogeneous type, meaning that each element in the array has the same type. Arrays always have a fixed length specified as a constant expression (except for open arrays). They can be indexed by any ordinal type. A parameter A may be an *open array*, in which case it is indexed by integers from 0 to len(A)-1. An array expression may be constructed by the array constructor []. The element type of this array expression is inferred from the type of the first element. All other elements need to be implicitly convertible to this type.

An array type can be defined using the array[size, T] syntax, or using array[lo..hi, T] for arrays that start at an index other than zero.

Sequences are similar to arrays but of dynamic length which may change during runtime (like strings). Sequences are implemented as growable arrays, allocating pieces of memory as items are added. A sequence S is always indexed by integers from 0 to len(S)-1 and its bounds are checked. Sequences can be constructed by the array constructor [] in conjunction with the array to sequence operator @. Another way to allocate space for a sequence is to call the built-in newSeq procedure.

A sequence may be passed to a parameter that is of type *open array*.

Example:

type IntArray = array[0..5, int] IntSeq = seq[int] var x: IntArray y: IntSeq x = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] y = @[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] let z = [1.0, 2, 3, 4]

The lower bound of an array or sequence may be received by the built-in proc low(), the higher bound by high(). The length may be received by len(). low() for a sequence or an open array always returns 0, as this is the first valid index. One can append elements to a sequence with the add() proc or the & operator, and remove (and get) the last element of a sequence with the pop() proc.

The notation x[i] can be used to access the i-th element of x.

Arrays are always bounds checked (statically or at runtime). These checks can be disabled via pragmas or invoking the compiler with the --boundChecks:off command-line switch.

An array constructor can have explicit indexes for readability:

type Values = enum valA, valB, valC const lookupTable = [ valA: "A", valB: "B", valC: "C" ]

If an index is left out, succ(lastIndex) is used as the index value:

type Values = enum valA, valB, valC, valD, valE const lookupTable = [ valA: "A", "B", valC: "C", "D", "e" ]

Often fixed size arrays turn out to be too inflexible; procedures should be able to deal with arrays of different sizes. The openarray type allows this; it can only be used for parameters. Open arrays are always indexed with an int starting at position 0. The len, low and high operations are available for open arrays too. Any array with a compatible base type can be passed to an open array parameter, the index type does not matter. In addition to arrays, sequences can also be passed to an open array parameter.

The openarray type cannot be nested: multidimensional open arrays are not supported because this is seldom needed and cannot be done efficiently.

proc testOpenArray(x: openArray[int]) = echo repr(x) testOpenArray([1,2,3]) testOpenArray(@[1,2,3])

A varargs parameter is an open array parameter that additionally allows a variable number of arguments to be passed to a procedure. The compiler converts the list of arguments to an array implicitly:

proc myWriteln(f: File, a: varargs[string]) = for s in items(a): write(f, s) write(f, "\n") myWriteln(stdout, "abc", "def", "xyz") myWriteln(stdout, ["abc", "def", "xyz"])

This transformation is only done if the varargs parameter is the last parameter in the procedure header. It is also possible to perform type conversions in this context:

proc myWriteln(f: File, a: varargs[string, `$`]) = for s in items(a): write(f, s) write(f, "\n") myWriteln(stdout, 123, "abc", 4.0) myWriteln(stdout, [$123, $"abc", $4.0])

In this example $ is applied to any argument that is passed to the parameter a. (Note that $ applied to strings is a nop.)

Note that an explicit array constructor passed to a varargs parameter is not wrapped in another implicit array construction:

proc takeV[T](a: varargs[T]) = discard takeV([123, 2, 1])

varargs[typed] is treated specially: It matches a variable list of arguments of arbitrary type but *always* constructs an implicit array. This is required so that the builtin echo proc does what is expected:

proc echo*(x: varargs[typed, `$`]) {...} echo @[1, 2, 3]

The UncheckedArray[T] type is a special kind of array where its bounds are not checked. This is often useful to implement customized flexibly sized arrays. Additionally, an unchecked array is translated into a C array of undetermined size:

type MySeq = object len, cap: int data: UncheckedArray[int]

Produces roughly this C code:

typedef struct { NI len; NI cap; NI data[]; } MySeq;

The base type of the unchecked array may not contain any GC'ed memory but this is currently not checked.

**Future directions**: GC'ed memory should be allowed in unchecked arrays and there should be an explicit annotation of how the GC is to determine the runtime size of the array.

A variable of a tuple or object type is a heterogeneous storage container. A tuple or object defines various named *fields* of a type. A tuple also defines a lexicographic *order* of the fields. Tuples are meant to be heterogeneous storage types with few abstractions. The () syntax can be used to construct tuples. The order of the fields in the constructor must match the order of the tuple's definition. Different tuple-types are *equivalent* if they specify the same fields of the same type in the same order. The *names* of the fields also have to be the same.

type Person = tuple[name: string, age: int] var person: Person person = (name: "Peter", age: 30) assert person.name == "Peter" person = ("Peter", 30) assert person[0] == "Peter" assert Person is (string, int) assert (string, int) is Person assert Person isnot tuple[other: string, age: int]

A tuple with one unnamed field can be constructed with the parentheses and a trailing comma:

proc echoUnaryTuple(a: (int,)) = echo a[0] echoUnaryTuple (1,)

In fact, a trailing comma is allowed for every tuple construction.

The implementation aligns the fields for the best access performance. The alignment is compatible with the way the C compiler does it.

For consistency with object declarations, tuples in a type section can also be defined with indentation instead of []:

type Person = tuple name: string age: Natural

Objects provide many features that tuples do not. Objects provide inheritance and the ability to hide fields from other modules. Objects with inheritance enabled have information about their type at runtime so that the of operator can be used to determine the object's type. The of operator is similar to the instanceof operator in Java.

type Person = object of RootObj name*: string age: int Student = ref object of Person id: int var student: Student person: Person assert(student of Student) assert(student of Person)

Object fields that should be visible from outside the defining module have to be marked by *. In contrast to tuples, different object types are never *equivalent*, they are nominal types whereas tuples are structural. Objects that have no ancestor are implicitly final and thus have no hidden type information. One can use the inheritable pragma to introduce new object roots apart from system.RootObj.

type Person = object name*: string age: int Student = ref object of Person id: int

The assignment operator for tuples and objects copies each component. The methods to override this copying behavior are described here.

Objects can also be created with an object construction expression that has the syntax T(fieldA: valueA, fieldB: valueB, ...) where T is an object type or a ref object type:

type Student = object name: string age: int PStudent = ref Student var a1 = Student(name: "Anton", age: 5) var a2 = PStudent(name: "Anton", age: 5) var a3 = (ref Student)(name: "Anton", age: 5) var a4 = Student(age: 5)

Note that, unlike tuples, objects require the field names along with their values. For a ref object type system.new is invoked implicitly.

Often an object hierarchy is an overkill in certain situations where simple variant types are needed. Object variants are tagged unions discriminated via an enumerated type used for runtime type flexibility, mirroring the concepts of *sum types* and *algebraic data types (ADTs)* as found in other languages.

An example:

type NodeKind = enum nkInt, nkFloat, nkString, nkAdd, nkSub, nkIf Node = ref NodeObj NodeObj = object case kind: NodeKind of nkInt: intVal: int of nkFloat: floatVal: float of nkString: strVal: string of nkAdd, nkSub: leftOp, rightOp: Node of nkIf: condition, thenPart, elsePart: Node var n = Node(kind: nkIf, condition: nil) n.thenPart = Node(kind: nkFloat, floatVal: 2.0) n.strVal = "" n.kind = nkInt var x = Node(kind: nkAdd, leftOp: Node(kind: nkInt, intVal: 4), rightOp: Node(kind: nkInt, intVal: 2)) x.kind = nkSub

As can be seen from the example, an advantage to an object hierarchy is that no casting between different object types is needed. Yet, access to invalid object fields raises an exception.

The syntax of case in an object declaration follows closely the syntax of the case statement: The branches in a case section may be indented too.

In the example, the kind field is called the discriminator: For safety, its address cannot be taken and assignments to it are restricted: The new value must not lead to a change of the active object branch. Also, when the fields of a particular branch are specified during object construction, the corresponding discriminator value must be specified as a constant expression.

Instead of changing the active object branch, replace the old object in memory with a new one completely:

var x = Node(kind: nkAdd, leftOp: Node(kind: nkInt, intVal: 4), rightOp: Node(kind: nkInt, intVal: 2)) x[] = NodeObj(kind: nkString, strVal: "abc")

Starting with version 0.20 system.reset cannot be used anymore to support object branch changes as this never was completely memory safe.

As a special rule, the discriminator kind can also be bounded using a case statement. If possible values of the discriminator variable in a case statement branch are a subset of discriminator values for the selected object branch, the initialization is considered valid. This analysis only works for immutable discriminators of an ordinal type and disregards elif branches. For discriminator values with a range type, the compiler checks if the entire range of possible values for the discriminator value is valid for the chosen object branch.

A small example:

let unknownKind = nkSub var y = Node(kind: unknownKind, strVal: "y") var z = Node() case unknownKind of nkAdd, nkSub: z = Node(kind: unknownKind, leftOp: Node(), rightOp: Node()) else: echo "ignoring: ", unknownKind let unknownKindBounded = range[nkAdd..nkSub](unknownKind) z = Node(kind: unknownKindBounded, leftOp: Node(), rightOp: Node())

Some restrictions for case objects can be disabled via a {.cast(uncheckedAssign).} section:

type TokenKind* = enum strLit, intLit Token = object case kind*: TokenKind of strLit: s*: string of intLit: i*: int64 proc passToVar(x: var TokenKind) = discard var t = Token(kind: strLit, s: "abc") {.cast(uncheckedAssign).}: passToVar(t.kind) t = Token(kind: t.kind, s: "abc") t.kind = intLit

Object fields are allowed to have a constant default value. The type of field can be omitted if a default value is given.

type Foo = object a: int = 2 b: float = 3.14 c = "I can have a default value" Bar = ref object a: int = 2 b: float = 3.14 c = "I can have a default value"

The explicit initialization uses these defaults which includes an object created with an object construction expression or the procedure default; a ref object created with an object construction expression or the procedure new; an array or a tuple with a subtype which has a default created with the procedure default.

type Foo = object a: int = 2 b = 3.0 Bar = ref object a: int = 2 b = 3.0 block: let x = Foo() assert x.a == 2 and x.b == 3.0 let y = Bar() assert y.a == 2 and y.b == 3.0 block: let x = default(Foo) assert x.a == 2 and x.b == 3.0 let y = default(array[1, Foo]) assert y[0].a == 2 and y[0].b == 3.0 let z = default(tuple[x: Foo]) assert z.x.a == 2 and z.x.b == 3.0 block: let y = new Bar assert y.a == 2 and y.b == 3.0

The set type models the mathematical notion of a set. The set's basetype can only be an ordinal type of a certain size, namely:

- int8-int16
- uint8/byte-uint16
- char
- enum
- Ordinal subrange types, i.e. range[-10..10]

or equivalent. When constructing a set with signed integer literals, the set's base type is defined to be in the range 0 .. DefaultSetElements-1 where DefaultSetElements is currently always 2^8. The maximum range length for the base type of a set is MaxSetElements which is currently always 2^16. Types with a bigger range length are coerced into the range 0 .. MaxSetElements-1.

The reason is that sets are implemented as high performance bit vectors. Attempting to declare a set with a larger type will result in an error:

var s: set[int64]

**Note:** Nim also offers hash sets (which you need to import with import std/sets), which have no such restrictions.

Sets can be constructed via the set constructor: {} is the empty set. The empty set is type compatible with any concrete set type. The constructor can also be used to include elements (and ranges of elements):

type CharSet = set[char] var x: CharSet x = {'a'..'z', '0'..'9'}

The module `std/setutils` provides a way to initialize a set from an iterable:

import std/setutils let uniqueChars = myString.toSet

These operations are supported by sets:

| operation | meaning |
|---|---|
| A + B | union of two sets |
| A * B | intersection of two sets |
| A - B | difference of two sets (A without B's elements) |
| A == B | set equality |
| A <= B | subset relation (A is subset of B or equal to B) |
| A < B | strict subset relation (A is a proper subset of B) |
| e in A | set membership (A contains element e) |
| e notin A | A does not contain element e |
| contains(A, e) | A contains element e |
| card(A) | the cardinality of A (number of elements in A) |
| incl(A, elem) | same as A = A + {elem} |
| excl(A, elem) | same as A = A - {elem} |

Sets are often used to define a type for the *flags* of a procedure. This is a cleaner (and type safe) solution than defining integer constants that have to be or'ed together.

Enum, sets and casting can be used together as in:

type MyFlag* {.size: sizeof(cint).} = enum A B C D MyFlags = set[MyFlag] proc toNum(f: MyFlags): int = cast[cint](f) proc toFlags(v: int): MyFlags = cast[MyFlags](v) assert toNum({}) == 0 assert toNum({A}) == 1 assert toNum({D}) == 8 assert toNum({A, C}) == 5 assert toFlags(0) == {} assert toFlags(7) == {A, B, C}

Note how the set turns enum values into powers of 2.

If using enums and sets with C, use distinct cint.

For interoperability with C see also the bitsize pragma.

References (similar to pointers in other programming languages) are a way to introduce many-to-one relationships. This means different references can point to and modify the same location in memory (also called aliasing).

Nim distinguishes between traced and untraced references. Untraced references are also called *pointers*. Traced references point to objects of a garbage-collected heap, untraced references point to manually allocated objects or objects somewhere else in memory. Thus, untraced references are *unsafe*. However, for certain low-level operations (accessing the hardware) untraced references are unavoidable.

Traced references are declared with the **ref** keyword, untraced references are declared with the **ptr** keyword. In general, a ptr T is implicitly convertible to the pointer type.

An empty subscript [] notation can be used to de-refer a reference, the addr procedure returns the address of an item. An address is always an untraced reference. Thus, the usage of addr is an *unsafe* feature.

The . (access a tuple/object field operator) and [] (array/string/sequence index operator) operators perform implicit dereferencing operations for reference types:

type Node = ref NodeObj NodeObj = object le, ri: Node data: int var n: Node new(n) n.data = 9

In order to simplify structural type checking, recursive tuples are not valid:

type MyTuple = tuple[a: ref MyTuple]

Likewise T = ref T is an invalid type.

As a syntactical extension, object types can be anonymous if declared in a type section via the ref object or ptr object notations. This feature is useful if an object should only gain reference semantics:

type Node = ref object le, ri: Node data: int

To allocate a new traced object, the built-in procedure new has to be used. To deal with untraced memory, the procedures alloc, dealloc and realloc can be used. The documentation of the system module contains further information.

If a reference points to *nothing*, it has the value nil. nil is the default value for all ref and ptr types. The nil value can also be used like any other literal value. For example, it can be used in an assignment like myRef = nil.

Dereferencing nil is an unrecoverable fatal runtime error (and not a panic).

A successful dereferencing operation p[] implies that p is not nil. This can be exploited by the implementation to optimize code like:

p[].field = 3 if p != nil: action()

Into:

p[].field = 3 action()

*Note*: This is not comparable to C's "undefined behavior" for dereferencing NULL pointers.

Special care has to be taken if an untraced object contains traced objects like traced references, strings, or sequences: in order to free everything properly, the built-in procedure reset has to be called before freeing the untraced memory manually:

type Data = tuple[x, y: int, s: string] var d = cast[ptr Data](alloc0(sizeof(Data))) d.s = "abc" reset(d.s) dealloc(d)

Without the reset call the memory allocated for the d.s string would never be freed. The example also demonstrates two important features for low-level programming: the sizeof proc returns the size of a type or value in bytes. The cast operator can circumvent the type system: the compiler is forced to treat the result of the alloc0 call (which returns an untyped pointer) as if it would have the type ptr Data. Casting should only be done if it is unavoidable: it breaks type safety and bugs can lead to mysterious crashes.

**Note**: The example only works because the memory is initialized to zero (alloc0 instead of alloc does this): d.s is thus initialized to binary zero which the string assignment can handle. One needs to know low-level details like this when mixing garbage-collected data with unmanaged memory.

A procedural type is internally a pointer to a procedure. nil is an allowed value for a variable of a procedural type.

Examples:

proc printItem(x: int) = ... proc forEach(c: proc (x: int) {.cdecl.}) = ... forEach(printItem)

type OnMouseMove = proc (x, y: int) {.closure.} proc onMouseMove(mouseX, mouseY: int) = echo "x: ", mouseX, " y: ", mouseY proc setOnMouseMove(mouseMoveEvent: OnMouseMove) = discard setOnMouseMove(onMouseMove)

A subtle issue with procedural types is that the calling convention of the procedure influences the type compatibility: procedural types are only compatible if they have the same calling convention. As a special extension, a procedure of the calling convention nimcall can be passed to a parameter that expects a proc of the calling convention closure.

Nim supports these calling conventions:

**nimcall**

is the default convention used for a Nim

proc

. It is the same as

fastcall

, but only for C compilers that support

fastcall

.

**closure**

is the default calling convention for a

procedural type

that lacks any pragma annotations. It indicates that the procedure has a hidden implicit parameter (an

environment

). Proc vars that have the calling convention

closure

take up two machine words: One for the proc pointer and another one for the pointer to implicitly passed environment.

**stdcall**

This is the stdcall convention as specified by Microsoft. The generated C procedure is declared with the

__stdcall

keyword.

**cdecl**

The cdecl convention means that a procedure shall use the same convention as the C compiler. Under Windows the generated C procedure is declared with the

__cdecl

keyword.

**safecall**

This is the safecall convention as specified by Microsoft. The generated C procedure is declared with the

__safecall

keyword. The word

safe

refers to the fact that all hardware registers shall be pushed to the hardware stack.

**inline**

The inline convention means the caller should not call the procedure, but inline its code directly. Note that Nim does not inline, but leaves this to the C compiler; it generates

__inline

procedures. This is only a hint for the compiler: it may completely ignore it, and it may inline procedures that are not marked as

inline

.

**noinline**

The backend compiler may inline procedures that are not marked as

inline

. The noinline convention prevents it.

**fastcall**

Fastcall means different things to different C compilers. One gets whatever the C

__fastcall

means.

**thiscall**

This is the thiscall calling convention as specified by Microsoft, used on C++ class member functions on the x86 architecture.

**syscall**

The syscall convention is the same as

__syscall

in C. It is used for interrupts.

**noconv**

The generated C code will not have any explicit calling convention and thus use the C compiler's default calling convention. This is needed because Nim's default calling convention for procedures is

fastcall

to improve speed.

Most calling conventions exist only for the Windows 32-bit platform.

The default calling convention is nimcall, unless it is an inner proc (a proc inside of a proc). For an inner proc an analysis is performed whether it accesses its environment. If it does so, it has the calling convention closure, otherwise it has the calling convention nimcall.

A distinct type is a new type derived from a base type that is incompatible with its base type. In particular, it is an essential property of a distinct type that it **does not** imply a subtype relation between it and its base type. Explicit type conversions from a distinct type to its base type and vice versa are allowed. See also distinctBase to get the reverse operation.

A distinct type is an ordinal type if its base type is an ordinal type.

A distinct type can be used to model different physical units with a numerical base type, for example. The following example models currencies.

Different currencies should not be mixed in monetary calculations. Distinct types are a perfect tool to model different currencies:

type Dollar = distinct int Euro = distinct int var d: Dollar e: Euro echo d + 12

Unfortunately, d + 12.Dollar is not allowed either, because + is defined for int (among others), not for Dollar. So a + for dollars needs to be defined:

proc `+` (x, y: Dollar): Dollar = result = Dollar(int(x) + int(y))

It does not make sense to multiply a dollar with a dollar, but with a number without unit; and the same holds for division:

proc `*` (x: Dollar, y: int): Dollar = result = Dollar(int(x) * y) proc `*` (x: int, y: Dollar): Dollar = result = Dollar(x * int(y)) proc `div` ...

This quickly gets tedious. The implementations are trivial and the compiler should not generate all this code only to optimize it away later - after all + for dollars should produce the same binary code as + for ints. The pragma borrow has been designed to solve this problem; in principle, it generates the above trivial implementations:

proc `*` (x: Dollar, y: int): Dollar {.borrow.} proc `*` (x: int, y: Dollar): Dollar {.borrow.} proc `div` (x: Dollar, y: int): Dollar {.borrow.}

The borrow pragma makes the compiler use the same implementation as the proc that deals with the distinct type's base type, so no code is generated.

But it seems all this boilerplate code needs to be repeated for the Euro currency. This can be solved with templates.

template additive(typ: typedesc) = proc `+` *(x, y: typ): typ {.borrow.} proc `-` *(x, y: typ): typ {.borrow.} proc `+` *(x: typ): typ {.borrow.} proc `-` *(x: typ): typ {.borrow.} template multiplicative(typ, base: typedesc) = proc `*` *(x: typ, y: base): typ {.borrow.} proc `*` *(x: base, y: typ): typ {.borrow.} proc `div` *(x: typ, y: base): typ {.borrow.} proc `mod` *(x: typ, y: base): typ {.borrow.} template comparable(typ: typedesc) = proc `<` * (x, y: typ): bool {.borrow.} proc `<=` * (x, y: typ): bool {.borrow.} proc `==` * (x, y: typ): bool {.borrow.} template defineCurrency(typ, base: untyped) = type typ* = distinct base additive(typ) multiplicative(typ, base) comparable(typ) defineCurrency(Dollar, int) defineCurrency(Euro, int)

The borrow pragma can also be used to annotate the distinct type to allow certain builtin operations to be lifted:

type Foo = object a, b: int s: string Bar {.borrow: `.`.} = distinct Foo var bb: ref Bar new bb bb.a = 90 bb.s = "abc"

Currently, only the dot accessor can be borrowed in this way.

An SQL statement that is passed from Nim to an SQL database might be modeled as a string. However, using string templates and filling in the values is vulnerable to the famous SQL injection attack:

import std/strutils proc query(db: DbHandle, statement: string) = ... var username: string db.query("SELECT FROM users WHERE name = '$1'" % username)

This can be avoided by distinguishing strings that contain SQL from strings that don't. Distinct types provide a means to introduce a new string type SQL that is incompatible with string:

type SQL = distinct string proc query(db: DbHandle, statement: SQL) = ... var username: string db.query("SELECT FROM users WHERE name = '$1'" % username)

It is an essential property of abstract types that they **do not** imply a subtype relation between the abstract type and its base type. Explicit type conversions from string to SQL are allowed:

import std/[strutils, sequtils] proc properQuote(s: string): SQL = return SQL(s) proc `%` (frmt: SQL, values: openarray[string]): SQL = let v = values.mapIt(properQuote(it)) type StrSeq = seq[string] result = SQL(string(frmt) % StrSeq(v)) db.query("SELECT FROM users WHERE name = '$1'".SQL % [username])

Now we have compile-time checking against SQL injection attacks. Since "".SQL is transformed to SQL("") no new syntax is needed for nice looking SQL string literals. The hypothetical SQL type actually exists in the library as the SqlQuery type of modules like db_sqlite.

The auto type can only be used for return types and parameters. For return types it causes the compiler to infer the type from the routine body:

proc returnsInt(): auto = 1984

For parameters it currently creates implicitly generic routines:

proc foo(a, b: auto) = discard

Is the same as:

proc foo[T1, T2](a: T1, b: T2) = discard

However, later versions of the language might change this to mean "infer the parameters' types from the body". Then the above foo would be rejected as the parameters' types can not be inferred from an empty discard statement.

The following section defines several relations on types that are needed to describe the type checking done by the compiler.

Nim uses structural type equivalence for most types. Only for objects, enumerations and distinct types and for generic types name equivalence is used.

If object a inherits from b, a is a subtype of b.

This subtype relation is extended to the types var, ref, ptr. If A is a subtype of B and A and B are object types then:

- var A is a subtype of var B
- ref A is a subtype of ref B
- ptr A is a subtype of ptr B.

**Note**: One of the above pointer-indirections is required for assignment from a subtype to its parent type to prevent "object slicing".

A type a is **implicitly** convertible to type b iff the following algorithm returns true:

proc isImplicitlyConvertible(a, b: PType): bool = if isSubtype(a, b): return true if isIntLiteral(a): return b in {int8, int16, int32, int64, int, uint, uint8, uint16, uint32, uint64, float32, float64} case a.kind of int: result = b in {int32, int64} of int8: result = b in {int16, int32, int64, int} of int16: result = b in {int32, int64, int} of int32: result = b in {int64, int} of uint: result = b in {uint32, uint64} of uint8: result = b in {uint16, uint32, uint64} of uint16: result = b in {uint32, uint64} of uint32: result = b in {uint64} of float32: result = b in {float64} of float64: result = b in {float32} of seq: result = b == openArray and typeEquals(a.baseType, b.baseType) of array: result = b == openArray and typeEquals(a.baseType, b.baseType) if a.baseType == char and a.indexType.rangeA == 0: result = b == cstring of cstring, ptr: result = b == pointer of string: result = b == cstring of proc: result = typeEquals(a, b) or compatibleParametersAndEffects(a, b)

We used the predicate typeEquals(a, b) for the "type equality" property and the predicate isSubtype(a, b) for the "subtype relation". compatibleParametersAndEffects(a, b) is currently not specified.

Implicit conversions are also performed for Nim's range type constructor.

Let a0, b0 of type T.

Let A = range[a0..b0] be the argument's type, F the formal parameter's type. Then an implicit conversion from A to F exists if a0 >= low(F) and b0 <= high(F) and both T and F are signed integers or if both are unsigned integers.

A type a is **explicitly** convertible to type b iff the following algorithm returns true:

proc isIntegralType(t: PType): bool = result = isOrdinal(t) or t.kind in {float, float32, float64} proc isExplicitlyConvertible(a, b: PType): bool = result = false if isImplicitlyConvertible(a, b): return true if typeEquals(a, b): return true if a == distinct and typeEquals(a.baseType, b): return true if b == distinct and typeEquals(b.baseType, a): return true if isIntegralType(a) and isIntegralType(b): return true if isSubtype(a, b) or isSubtype(b, a): return true

The convertible relation can be relaxed by a user-defined type converter.

converter toInt(x: char): int = result = ord(x) var x: int chr: char = 'a' x = chr echo x x = chr.toInt echo x

The type conversion T(a) is an L-value if a is an L-value and typeEqualsOrDistinct(T, typeof(a)) holds.

An expression b can be assigned to an expression a iff a is an l-value and isImplicitlyConvertible(b.typ, a.typ) holds.

In a call p(args) where p may refer to more than one candidate, it is said to be a symbol choice. Overload resolution will attempt to find the best candidate, thus transforming the symbol choice into a resolved symbol. The routine p that matches best is selected following a series of trials explained below. In order: Category matching, Hierarchical Order Comparison, and finally, Complexity Analysis.

If multiple candidates match equally well after all trials have been tested, the ambiguity is reported during semantic analysis.

Every arg in args needs to match and there are multiple different categories of matches. Let f be the formal parameter's type and a the type of the argument.

1. Exact match: a and f are of the same type.
2. Literal match: a is an integer literal of value v and f is a signed or unsigned integer type and v is in f's range. Or: a is a floating-point literal of value v and f is a floating-point type and v is in f's range.
3. Generic match: f is a generic type and a matches, for instance a is int and f is a generic (constrained) parameter type (like in [T] or [T: int|char]).
4. Subrange or subtype match: a is a range[T] and T matches f exactly. Or: a is a subtype of f.
5. Integral conversion match: a is convertible to f and f and a is some integer or floating-point type.
6. Conversion match: a is convertible to f, possibly via a user defined converter.

Each operand may fall into one of the categories above; the operand's highest priority category. The list above is in order or priority. If a candidate has more priority matches than all other candidates, it is selected as the resolved symbol.

For example, if a candidate with one exact match is compared to a candidate with multiple generic matches and zero exact matches, the candidate with an exact match will win.

Below is a pseudocode interpretation of category matching, count(p, m) counts the number of matches of the matching category m for the routine p.

A routine p matches better than a routine q if the following algorithm returns true:

for each matching category m in ["exact match", "literal match", "generic match", "subtype match", "integral match", "conversion match"]: if count(p, m) > count(q, m): return true elif count(p, m) == count(q, m): discard "continue with next category m" else: return false return "ambiguous"

The hierarchical order of a type is analogous to its relative specificity. Consider the type defined:

type A[T] = object

Matching formals for this type include T, object, A, A[...] and A[C] where C is a concrete type, A[...] is a generic typeclass composition and T is an unconstrained generic type variable. This list is in order of specificity with respect to A as each subsequent category narrows the set of types that are members of their match set.

In this trial, the formal parameters of candidates are compared in order (1st parameter, 2nd parameter, etc.) to search for a candidate that has an unrivaled specificity. If such a formal parameter is found, the candidate it belongs to is chosen as the resolved symbol.

A slight clarification: While category matching digests all the formal parameters of a candidate at once (order doesn't matter), specificity comparison and complexity analysis operate on each formal parameter at a time. The following is the final trial to disambiguate a symbol choice when a pair of formal parameters have the same hierarchical order.

The complexity of a type is essentially its number of modifiers and depth of shape. The definition with the *highest* complexity wins. Consider the following types:

type A[T] = object B[T, H] = object

Note: The below examples are not exhaustive.

We shall say that:

1. A[T] has a higher complexity than A
2. var A[T] has a higher complexity than A[T]
3. A[A[T]] has a higher complexity than A[T]
4. B[T, H] has a higher complexity than A[T] (A and B are not compatible here, but convoluted versions of this exist)
5. B[ptr T, H] has a higher complexity than B[T, H]

proc takesInt(x: int) = echo "int" proc takesInt[T](x: T) = echo "T" proc takesInt(x: int16) = echo "int16" takesInt(4) var x: int32 takesInt(x) var y: int16 takesInt(y) var z: range[0..4] = 0 takesInt(z)

If the argument a matches both the parameter type f of p and g of q via a subtyping relation, the inheritance depth is taken into account:

type A = object of RootObj B = object of A C = object of B proc p(obj: A) = echo "A" proc p(obj: B) = echo "B" var c = C() p(c) proc pp(obj: A, obj2: B) = echo "A B" proc pp(obj: B, obj2: A) = echo "B A" pp(c, c)

Likewise, for generic matches, the most specialized generic type (that still matches) is preferred:

proc gen[T](x: ref ref T) = echo "ref ref T" proc gen[T](x: ref T) = echo "ref T" proc gen[T](x: T) = echo "T" var ri: ref int gen(ri)

When overload resolution is considering candidates, the type variable's definition is not overlooked as it is used to define the formal parameter's type via variable substitution.

For example:

type A proc p[T: A](param: T) proc p[T: object](param: T)

These signatures are not ambiguous for a concrete type of A even though the formal parameters match ("T" == "T"). Instead T is treated as a variable in that (T ?= T) depending on the bound type of T at the time of overload resolution.

If the formal parameter f is of type var T in addition to the ordinary type checking, the argument is checked to be an l-value. var T matches better than just T then.

proc sayHi(x: int): string = result = $x proc sayHi(x: var int): string = result = $(x + 10) proc sayHello(x: int) = var m = x echo sayHi(x) echo sayHi(m) sayHello(3)

**Note**: An unresolved expression is an expression for which no symbol lookups and no type checking have been performed.

Since templates and macros that are not declared as immediate participate in overloading resolution, it's essential to have a way to pass unresolved expressions to a template or macro. This is what the meta-type untyped accomplishes:

template rem(x: untyped) = discard rem unresolvedExpression(undeclaredIdentifier)

A parameter of type untyped always matches any argument (as long as there is any argument passed to it).

But one has to watch out because other overloads might trigger the argument's resolution:

template rem(x: untyped) = discard proc rem[T](x: T) = discard rem unresolvedExpression(undeclaredIdentifier)

untyped and varargs[untyped] are the only metatype that are lazy in this sense, the other metatypes typed and typedesc are not lazy.

See Varargs.

A called iterator yielding type T can be passed to a template or macro via a parameter typed as untyped (for unresolved expressions) or the type class iterable or iterable[T] (after type checking and overload resolution).

iterator iota(n: int): int = for i in 0..<n: yield i template toSeq2[T](a: iterable[T]): seq[T] = var ret: seq[T] assert a.typeof is T for ai in a: ret.add ai ret assert iota(3).toSeq2 == @[0, 1, 2] assert toSeq2(5..7) == @[5, 6, 7] assert not compiles(toSeq2(@[1,2])) assert toSeq2(items(@[1,2])) == @[1, 2]

For routine calls "overload resolution" is performed. There is a weaker form of overload resolution called *overload disambiguation* that is performed when an overloaded symbol is used in a context where there is additional type information available. Let p be an overloaded symbol. These contexts are:

- In a function call q(..., p, ...) when the corresponding formal parameter of q is a proc type. If q itself is overloaded then the cartesian product of every interpretation of q and p must be considered.
- In an object constructor Obj(..., field: p, ...) when field is a proc type. Analogous rules exist for array/set/tuple constructors.
- In a declaration like x: T = p when T is a proc type.

As usual, ambiguous matches produce a compile-time error.

Routines with the same type signature can be called individually if a parameter has different names between them.

proc foo(x: int) = echo "Using x: ", x proc foo(y: int) = echo "Using y: ", y foo(x = 2) foo(y = 2)

Not supplying the parameter name in such cases results in an ambiguity error.

Concepts are a mechanism for users to define custom type classes that match other types based on a given set of bindings.

type Comparable = concept proc cmp(a, b: Self): int Indexable[I, T] = concept proc `[]`(x: Self; at: I): T proc `[]=`(x: var Self; at: I; newVal: T) proc len(x: Self): I Index = concept proc inc(x: var Self) proc `<`(a, b: Self): bool proc sort*[I: Index; T: Comparable](x: var Indexable[I, T])

In the above example, Comparable and Indexable are types that will match any type that can can bind each definition declared in the concept body. The special Self type defined in the concept body refers to the type being matched, also called the "implementation" of the concept. Implementations that match the concept are generic matches, and the concept typeclasses themselves work in a similar way to generic type variables in that they are never concrete types themselves (even if they have concrete type parameters such as Indexable[int, int]) and expressions like typeof(x) in the body of proc sort from the above example will return the type of the implementation, not the concept typeclass. Concepts are useful for providing information to the compiler in generic contexts, most notably for generic type checking, and as a tool for Overload resolution. Generic type checking is forthcoming, so this will only explain overload resolution for now.

In the example above, "atomic" and "container" concepts are mentioned. These kinds of concept are determined by the generic type variables of the concept. Atomic concepts` definitions contain only concrete types, and the Self type is inferred to be concrete. Container types are the same, under the condition that their generic variables are bound to concrete types and substituted appropriately. The programmer is free to define a concept that breaks these concreteness rules, thus making a "gray" concept:

type Processor = concept proc process[T](s: Self; data: T)

The above concept does not have generic variables, and its definition contains T which is not concrete. This kind of concept may disrupt the compiler's ability to type check generic contexts, but it is useful for overload resolution. The difference between Indexable[I, T] and Processor is that a given implementation is effectively described as an instantiation of Indexable (as in Indexable[int, int]) whereas a Processor concept describes an implementation designed to handle multiple different types of data T.

When an operand's type is being matched to a concept, the operand's type is set as the "potential implementation". For each definition in the concept body, overload resolution is performed by substituting Self for the potential implementation to try and find a match for each definition. If this succeeds, the concept matches. Implementations do not need to exactly match the definitions in the concept. For example:

type C1 = concept proc p(s: Self; x: int) Implementation = object proc p(x: Implementation; y: SomeInteger) proc spring(x: C1) spring(Implementation()) This will bind because p(Implementation(), 0) will bind. Conversely, container types will bind to less specific definitions if the generic constraints and bindings allow it, as per usual generic matching.

Things start to get more complicated when overload resolution starts "Hierarchical Order Comparison" I.E. specificity comparison as per Overload resolution. In this state the compiler may be comparing all kinds of types and typeclasses with concepts as defined in the proc definitions of each overload. This leads to confusing and impractical behavior in most situations, so the rules are simplified. They are:

1. if a concept is being compared with T or any type that accepts all other types (auto) the concept is more specific

1. if the concept is being compared with another concept the result is deferred to Concept subset matching
2. in any other case the concept is less specific then it's competitor

Currently, the concept evaluation mechanism evaluates to a successful match on the first acceptable candidate for each defined binding. This has a couple of notable effects:

- generic parameters are fulfilled by the first candidate match even if other candidates would also match and bind different parameters
- inheritable objects match as they do in normal overload resolution except the "depth" is not accounted for, because that would require calculating the minimum depth of any matching binding

This type of matching is simple. When comparing concepts C1 and C2, if all valid implementations of C1 are also valid implementations of C2 but not vice versa then C1 is a subset of C2. This means that C1 will match to C2 and therefore the disambiguation process will prefer C2 as it is more specific. If neither of them are subsets of one another, then the disambiguation proceeds to complexity analysis and the concept with the most definitions wins, if any. No definite winner is an ambiguity error at compile time.

Concepts can reference themselves in their definitions, enabling recursive type constraints. This is useful for matching distinct types that should inherit traits from their base type:

import std/typetraits type PrimitiveBase = SomeNumber | bool | ptr | pointer | enum Primitive = concept x x is PrimitiveBase or distinctBase(x) is Primitive Handle = distinct int SpecialHandle = distinct Handle assert int is Primitive assert Handle is Primitive assert SpecialHandle is Primitive assert not (string is Primitive)

Concepts can also be mutually recursive (co-dependent):

type Serializable = concept proc serialize(s: Self; writer: var Writer) Writer = concept proc write(w: var Self; data: Serializable)

The compiler uses cycle detection to handle these cases without infinite recursion.

Nim uses the common statement/expression paradigm: Statements do not produce a value in contrast to expressions. However, some expressions are statements.

Statements are separated into simple statements and complex statements. Simple statements are statements that cannot contain other statements like assignments, calls, or the return statement; complex statements can contain other statements. To avoid the dangling else problem, complex statements always have to be indented. The details can be found in the grammar.

Statements can also occur in an expression context that looks like (stmt1; stmt2; ...; ex). This is called a statement list expression or (;). The type of (stmt1; stmt2; ...; ex) is the type of ex. All the other statements must be of type void. (One can use discard to produce a void type.) (;) does not introduce a new scope.

Example:

proc p(x, y: int): int = result = x + y discard p(3, 4)

The discard statement evaluates its expression for side-effects and throws the expression's resulting value away, and should only be used when ignoring this value is known not to cause problems.

Ignoring the return value of a procedure without using a discard statement is a static error.

The return value can be ignored implicitly if the called proc/iterator has been declared with the discardable pragma:

proc p(x, y: int): int {.discardable.} = result = x + y p(3, 4)

however the discardable pragma does not work on templates as templates substitute the AST in place. For example:

{.push discardable .} template example(): string = "https://nim-lang.org" {.pop.} example()

This template will resolve into "https://nim-lang.org" which is a string literal and since {.discardable.} doesn't apply to literals, the compiler will error.

An empty discard statement is often used as a null statement:

proc classify(s: string) = case s[0] of SymChars, '_': echo "an identifier" of '0'..'9': echo "a number" else: discard

In a list of statements, every expression except the last one needs to have the type void. In addition to this rule an assignment to the builtin result symbol also triggers a mandatory void context for the subsequent expressions:

proc invalid*(): string = result = "foo" "invalid"

proc valid*(): string = let x = 317 "valid"

Var statements declare new local and global variables and initialize them. A comma-separated list of variables can be used to specify variables of the same type:

var a: int = 0 x, y, z: int

If an initializer is given, the type can be omitted: the variable is then of the same type as the initializing expression. Variables are always initialized with a default value if there is no initializing expression. The default value depends on the type and is always a zero in binary.

| Type | default value |
|---|---|
| any integer type | 0 |
| any float | 0.0 |
| char | '\0' |
| bool | false |
| ref or pointer type | nil |
| procedural type | nil |
| sequence | @[] |
| string | "" |
| tuple[x: A, y: B, ...] | (zeroDefault(A), zeroDefault(B), ...) (analogous for objects) |
| array[0..., T] | [zeroDefault(T), ...] |
| range[T] | default(T); this may be out of the valid range |
| T = enum | cast[T](0); this may be an invalid value |

The implicit initialization can be avoided for optimization reasons with the noinit pragma:

var a {.noinit.}: array[0..1023, char]

If a proc is annotated with the noinit pragma, this refers to its implicit result variable:

proc returnUndefinedValue: int {.noinit.} = discard

The implicit initialization can also be prevented by the requiresInit type pragma. The compiler requires an explicit initialization for the object and all of its fields. However, it does a control flow analysis to prove the variable has been initialized and does not rely on syntactic properties:

type MyObject {.requiresInit.} = object proc p() = var x: MyObject if someCondition(): x = a() else: x = a()

requiresInit pragma can also be applied to distinct types.

Given the following distinct type definitions:

type Foo = object x: string DistinctFoo {.requiresInit, borrow: `.`.} = distinct Foo DistinctString {.requiresInit.} = distinct string

The following code blocks will fail to compile:

var foo: DistinctFoo foo.x = "test" doAssert foo.x == "test"

var s: DistinctString s = "test" doAssert string(s) == "test"

But these will compile successfully:

let foo = DistinctFoo(Foo(x: "test")) doAssert foo.x == "test"

let s = DistinctString("test") doAssert string(s) == "test"

A let statement declares new local and global single assignment variables and binds a value to them. The syntax is the same as that of the var statement, except that the keyword var is replaced by the keyword let. Let variables are not l-values and can thus not be passed to var parameters nor can their address be taken. They cannot be assigned new values.

For let variables, the same pragmas are available as for ordinary variables.

As let statements are immutable after creation they need to define a value when they are declared. The only exception to this is if the {.importc.} pragma (or any of the other importX pragmas) is applied, in this case the value is expected to come from native code, typically a C/C++ const.

The identifier _ has a special meaning in declarations. Any definition with the name _ will not be added to scope, meaning the definition is evaluated, but cannot be used. As a result the name _ can be indefinitely redefined.

let _ = 123 echo _ let _ = 456

In a var, let or const statement tuple unpacking can be performed. The special identifier _ can be used to ignore some parts of the tuple:

proc returnsTuple(): (int, int, int) = (4, 2, 3) let (x, _, z) = returnsTuple()

This is treated as syntax sugar for roughly the following:

let tmpTuple = returnsTuple() x = tmpTuple[0] z = tmpTuple[2]

For var or let statements, if the value expression is a tuple literal, each expression is directly expanded into an assignment without the use of a temporary variable.

let (x, y, z) = (1, 2, 3) let x = 1 y = 2 z = 3

Tuple unpacking can also be nested:

proc returnsNestedTuple(): (int, (int, int), int, int) = (4, (5, 7), 2, 3) let (x, (_, y), _, z) = returnsNestedTuple()

A const section declares constants whose values are constant expressions:

import std/[strutils] const roundPi = 3.1415 constEval = contains("abc", 'b')

Once declared, a constant's symbol can be used as a constant expression.

The value part of a constant declaration opens a new scope for each constant, so no symbols declared in the constant value are accessible outside of it.

const foo = (var a = 1; a) const bar = a let baz = a

See Constants and Constant Expressions for details.

A static statement/expression explicitly requires compile-time execution. Even some code that has side effects is permitted in a static block:

static: echo "echo at compile time"

static can also be used like a routine.

proc getNum(a: int): int = a static: echo getNum(123) echo static(getNum(123))

There are limitations on what Nim code can be executed at compile time; see Restrictions on Compile-Time Execution for details. It's a static error if the compiler cannot execute the block at compile time.

Example:

var name = readLine(stdin) if name == "Andreas": echo "What a nice name!" elif name == "": echo "Don't you have a name?" else: echo "Boring name..."

The if statement is a simple way to make a branch in the control flow: The expression after the keyword if is evaluated, if it is true the corresponding statements after the : are executed. Otherwise, the expression after the elif is evaluated (if there is an elif branch), if it is true the corresponding statements after the : are executed. This goes on until the last elif. If all conditions fail, the else part is executed. If there is no else part, execution continues with the next statement.

In if statements, new scopes begin immediately after the if/elif/else keywords and ends after the corresponding *then* block. For visualization purposes the scopes have been enclosed in {| |} in the following example:

if {| (let m = input =~ re"(\w+)=\w+"; m.isMatch): echo "key ", m[0], " value ", m[1] |} elif {| (let m = input =~ re""; m.isMatch): echo "new m in this scope" |} else: {| echo "m not declared here" |}

Example:

let line = readline(stdin) case line of "delete-everything", "restart-computer": echo "permission denied" of "go-for-a-walk": echo "please yourself" elif line.len == 0: echo "empty" else: echo "unknown command" case readline(stdin): of "delete-everything", "restart-computer": echo "permission denied" of "go-for-a-walk": echo "please yourself" else: echo "unknown command"

The case statement is similar to the if statement, but it represents a multi-branch selection. The expression after the keyword case is evaluated and if its value is in a *slicelist* the corresponding statements (after the of keyword) are executed. If the value is not in any given *slicelist*, trailing elif and else parts are executed using same semantics as for if statement, and elif is handled just like else: if. If there are no else or elif parts and not all possible values that expr can hold occur in a *slicelist*, a static error occurs. This holds only for expressions of ordinal types. "All possible values" of expr are determined by expr's type. To suppress the static error an else: discard should be used.

Only ordinal types, floats, strings and cstrings are allowed as values in case statements.

For non-ordinal types, it is not possible to list every possible value and so these always require an else part. An exception to this rule is for the string type, which currently doesn't require a trailing else or elif branch; it's unspecified whether this will keep working in future versions.

Because case statements are checked for exhaustiveness during semantic analysis, the value in every of branch must be a constant expression. This restriction also allows the compiler to generate more performant code.

As a special semantic extension, an expression in an of branch of a case statement may evaluate to a set or array constructor; the set or array is then expanded into a list of its elements:

const SymChars: set[char] = {'a'..'z', 'A'..'Z', '\x80'..'\xFF'} proc classify(s: string) = case s[0] of SymChars, '_': echo "an identifier" of '0'..'9': echo "a number" else: echo "other" proc classify(s: string) = case s[0] of 'a'..'z', 'A'..'Z', '\x80'..'\xFF', '_': echo "an identifier" of '0'..'9': echo "a number" else: echo "other"

The case statement doesn't produce an l-value, so the following example won't work:

type Foo = ref object x: seq[string] proc get_x(x: Foo): var seq[string] = case true of true: x.x else: x.x var foo = Foo(x: @[]) foo.get_x().add("asd")

This can be fixed by explicitly using result or return:

proc get_x(x: Foo): var seq[string] = case true of true: result = x.x else: result = x.x

Example:

when sizeof(int) == 2: echo "running on a 16 bit system!" elif sizeof(int) == 4: echo "running on a 32 bit system!" elif sizeof(int) == 8: echo "running on a 64 bit system!" else: echo "cannot happen!"

The when statement is almost identical to the if statement with some exceptions:

- Each condition (expr) has to be a constant expression (of type bool).
- The statements do not open a new scope.
- The statements that belong to the expression that evaluated to true are translated by the compiler, the other statements are not checked for semantics! However, each condition is checked for semantics.

The when statement enables conditional compilation techniques. As a special syntactic extension, the when construct is also available within object definitions.

nimvm is a special symbol that may be used as the expression of a when nimvm statement to differentiate the execution path between compile-time and the executable.

Example:

proc someProcThatMayRunInCompileTime(): bool = when nimvm: result = true else: result = false const ctValue = someProcThatMayRunInCompileTime() let rtValue = someProcThatMayRunInCompileTime() assert(ctValue == true) assert(rtValue == false)

A when nimvm statement must meet the following requirements:

- Its expression must always be nimvm. More complex expressions are not allowed.
- It must not contain elif branches.
- It must contain an else branch.
- Code in branches must not affect semantics of the code that follows the when nimvm statement. E.g. it must not define symbols that are used in the following code.

Example:

return 40 + 2

The return statement ends the execution of the current procedure. It is only allowed in procedures. If there is an expr, this is syntactic sugar for:

result = expr return result

return without an expression is a short notation for return result if the proc has a return type. The result variable is always the return value of the procedure. It is automatically declared by the compiler. As all variables, result is initialized to (binary) zero:

proc returnZero(): int =

Example:

yield (1, 2, 3)

The yield statement is used instead of the return statement in iterators. It is only valid in iterators. Execution is returned to the body of the for loop that called the iterator. Yield does not end the iteration process, but the execution is passed back to the iterator if the next iteration starts. See the section about iterators (Iterators and the for statement) for further information.

Example:

var found = false block myblock: for i in 0..3: for j in 0..3: if a[j][i] == 7: found = true break myblock echo found

The block statement is a means to group statements to a (named) block. Inside the block, the break statement is allowed to leave the block immediately. A break statement can contain a name of a surrounding block to specify which block is to be left.

Example:

break

The break statement is used to leave a block immediately. If symbol is given, it is the name of the enclosing block that is to be left. If it is absent, the innermost block is left.

Example:

echo "Please tell me your password:" var pw = readLine(stdin) while pw != "12345": echo "Wrong password! Next try:" pw = readLine(stdin)

The while statement is executed until the expr evaluates to false. Endless loops are no error. while statements open an implicit block so that they can be left with a break statement.

A continue statement leads to the immediate next iteration of the surrounding loop construct. It is only allowed within a loop. A continue statement is syntactic sugar for a nested block:

while expr1: stmt1 continue stmt2

Is equivalent to:

while expr1: block myBlockName: stmt1 break myBlockName stmt2

The direct embedding of assembler code into Nim code is supported by the unsafe asm statement. Identifiers in the assembler code that refer to Nim identifiers shall be enclosed in a special character which can be specified in the statement's pragmas. The default special character is '`':

{.push stackTrace:off.} proc addInt(a, b: int): int = asm """ mov eax, `a` add eax, `b` jno theEnd call `raiseOverflow` theEnd: """ {.pop.}

If the GNU assembler is used, quotes and newlines are inserted automatically:

proc addInt(a, b: int): int = asm """ addl %%ecx, %%eax jno 1 call `raiseOverflow` 1: :"=a"(`result`) :"a"(`a`), "c"(`b`) """

Instead of:

proc addInt(a, b: int): int = asm """ "addl %%ecx, %%eax\n" "jno 1\n" "call `raiseOverflow`\n" "1: \n" :"=a"(`result`) :"a"(`a`), "c"(`b`) """

The using statement provides syntactic convenience in modules where the same parameter names and types are used over and over. Instead of:

proc foo(c: Context; n: Node) = ... proc bar(c: Context; n: Node, counter: int) = ... proc baz(c: Context; n: Node) = ...

One can tell the compiler about the convention that a parameter of name c should default to type Context, n should default to Node etc.:

using c: Context n: Node counter: int proc foo(c, n) = ... proc bar(c, n, counter) = ... proc baz(c, n) = ... proc mixedMode(c, n; x, y: int) =

The using section uses the same indentation based grouping syntax as a var or let section.

Note that using is not applied for template since the untyped template parameters default to the type system.untyped.

Mixing parameters that should use the using declaration with parameters that are explicitly typed is possible and requires a semicolon between them.

An if expression is almost like an if statement, but it is an expression. This feature is similar to *ternary operators* in other languages. Example:

var y = if x > 8: 9 else: 10

An if expression always results in a value, so the else part is required. elif parts are also allowed.

Just like an if expression, but corresponding to the when statement.

The case expression is again very similar to the case statement:

var favoriteFood = case animal of "dog": "bones" of "cat": "mice" elif animal.endsWith"whale": "plankton" else: echo "I'm not sure what to serve, but everybody loves ice cream" "ice cream"

As seen in the above example, the case expression can also introduce side effects. When multiple statements are given for a branch, Nim will use the last expression as the result value.

A block expression is almost like a block statement, but it is an expression that uses the last expression under the block as the value. It is similar to the statement list expression, but the statement list expression does not open a new block scope.

let a = block: var fib = @[0, 1] for i in 0..10: fib.add fib[^1] + fib[^2] fib

A table constructor is syntactic sugar for an array constructor:

{"key1": "value1", "key2", "key3": "value2"} [("key1", "value1"), ("key2", "value2"), ("key3", "value2")]

The empty table can be written {:} (in contrast to the empty set which is {}) which is thus another way to write the empty array constructor []. This slightly unusual way of supporting tables has lots of advantages:

- The order of the (key,value)-pairs is preserved, thus it is easy to support ordered dicts with for example {key: val}.newOrderedTable.
- A table literal can be put into a const section and the compiler can easily put it into the executable's data section just like it can for arrays and the generated data section requires a minimal amount of memory.
- Every table implementation is treated equally syntactically.
- Apart from the minimal syntactic sugar, the language core does not need to know about tables.

Syntactically a *type conversion* is like a procedure call, but a type name replaces the procedure name. A type conversion is always safe in the sense that a failure to convert a type to another results in an exception (if it cannot be determined statically).

Ordinary procs are often preferred over type conversions in Nim: For instance, $ is the toString operator by convention and toFloat and toInt can be used to convert from floating-point to integer or vice versa.

Type conversion can also be used to disambiguate overloaded routines:

proc p(x: int) = echo "int" proc p(x: string) = echo "string" let procVar = (proc(x: string))(p) procVar("a")

Since operations on unsigned numbers wrap around and are unchecked so are type conversions to unsigned integers and between unsigned integers. The rationale for this is mostly better interoperability with the C Programming language when algorithms are ported from C to Nim.

**Note**: Historically the operations were unchecked and the conversions were sometimes checked but starting with the revision 1.0.4 of this document and the language implementation the conversions too are now *always unchecked*.

*Type casts* are a crude mechanism to interpret the bit pattern of an expression as if it would be of another type. Type casts are only needed for low-level programming and are inherently unsafe.

cast[int](x)

The target type of a cast must be a concrete type, for instance, a target type that is a type class (which is non-concrete) would be invalid:

type Foo = int or float var x = cast[Foo](1)

Type casts should not be confused with *type conversions,* as mentioned in the prior section. Unlike type conversions, a type cast cannot change the underlying bit pattern of the data being cast (aside from that the size of the target type may differ from the source type). Casting resembles *type punning* in other languages or C++'s reinterpret_cast and bit_cast features.

If the size of the target type is larger than the size of the source type, the remaining memory is zeroed.

The addr operator returns the address of an l-value. If the type of the location is T, the addr operator result is of the type ptr T. An address is always an untraced reference. Taking the address of an object that resides on the stack is **unsafe**, as the pointer may live longer than the object on the stack and can thus reference a non-existing object. One can get the address of variables. For easier interoperability with other compiled languages such as C, retrieving the address of a let variable, a parameter, or a for loop variable can be accomplished too:

let t1 = "Hello" var t2 = t1 t3 : pointer = addr(t2) echo repr(addr(t2)) echo cast[ptr string](t3)[] echo repr(addr(t1))

The unsafeAddr operator is a deprecated alias for the addr operator:

let myArray = [1, 2, 3] foreignProcThatTakesAnAddr(unsafeAddr myArray)

What most programming languages call methods or functions are called procedures in Nim. A procedure declaration consists of an identifier, zero or more formal parameters, a return value type and a block of code. Formal parameters are declared as a list of identifiers separated by either comma or semicolon. A parameter is given a type by : typename. The type applies to all parameters immediately before it, until either the beginning of the parameter list, a semicolon separator, or an already typed parameter, is reached. The semicolon can be used to make separation of types and subsequent identifiers more distinct.

proc foo(a, b: int, c, d: bool): int proc foo(a, b: int; c, d: bool): int proc foo(a; b: int; c, d: bool): int

A parameter may be declared with a default value which is used if the caller does not provide a value for the argument. The value will be reevaluated every time the function is called.

proc foo(a: int, b: int = 47): int

Parameters can be declared mutable and so allow the proc to modify those arguments, by using the type modifier var.

proc foo(inp: int, outp: var int) = outp = inp + 47

If the proc declaration doesn't have a body, it is a forward declaration. If the proc returns a value, the procedure body can access an implicitly declared variable named result that represents the return value. Procs can be overloaded. The overloading resolution algorithm determines which proc is the best match for the arguments. Example:

proc toLower(c: char): char = if c in {'A'..'Z'}: result = chr(ord(c) + (ord('a') - ord('A'))) else: result = c proc toLower(s: string): string = result = newString(len(s)) for i in 0..len(s) - 1: result[i] = toLower(s[i])

Calling a procedure can be done in many ways:

proc callme(x, y: int, s: string = "", c: char, b: bool = false) = ... callme(0, 1, "abc", '\t', true) callme(y=1, x=0, "abd", '\t') callme(c='\t', y=1, x=0) callme 0, 1, "abc", '\t'

A procedure may call itself recursively.

Operators are procedures with a special operator symbol as identifier:

proc `$` (x: int): string = result = intToStr(x)

Operators with one parameter are prefix operators, operators with two parameters are infix operators. (However, the parser distinguishes these from the operator's position within an expression.) There is no way to declare postfix operators: all postfix operators are built-in and handled by the grammar explicitly.

Any operator can be called like an ordinary proc with the `opr` notation. (Thus an operator can have more than two parameters):

proc `*+` (a, b, c: int): int = result = a * b + c assert `*+`(3, 4, 6) == `+`(`*`(3, 4), 6)

If a declared symbol is marked with an asterisk it is exported from the current module:

proc exportedEcho*(s: string) = echo s proc `*`*(a: string; b: int): string = result = newStringOfCap(a.len * b) for i in 1..b: result.add a var exportedVar*: int const exportedConst* = 78 type ExportedType* = object exportedField*: int

For object-oriented programming, the syntax obj.methodName(args) can be used instead of methodName(obj, args). The parentheses can be omitted if there are no remaining arguments: obj.len (instead of len(obj)).

This method call syntax is not restricted to objects, it can be used to supply any type of first argument for procedures:

echo "abc".len echo "abc".toUpper() echo {'a', 'b', 'c'}.card stdout.writeLine("Hallo")

Another way to look at the method call syntax is that it provides the missing postfix notation.

The method call syntax conflicts with explicit generic instantiations: p[T](x) cannot be written as x.p[T] because x.p[T] is always parsed as (x.p)[T].

See also: Limitations of the method call syntax.

The [: ] notation has been designed to mitigate this issue: x.p[:T] is rewritten by the parser to p[T](x), x.p[:T](y) is rewritten to p[T](x, y). Note that [: ] has no AST representation, the rewrite is performed directly in the parsing step.

Nim has no need for *get-properties*: Ordinary get-procedures that are called with the *method call syntax* achieve the same. But setting a value is different; for this, a special setter syntax is needed:

type Socket* = ref object of RootObj host: int proc `host=`*(s: var Socket, value: int) {.inline.} = s.host = value proc host*(s: Socket): int {.inline.} = s.host

import asocket var s: Socket new s s.host = 34

A proc defined as f= (with the trailing =) is called a setter. A setter can be called explicitly via the common backticks notation:

proc `f=`(x: MyObject; value: string) = discard `f=`(myObject, "value")

f= can be called implicitly in the pattern x.f = value if and only if the type of x does not have a field named f or if f is not visible in the current module. These rules ensure that object fields and accessors can have the same name. Within the module x.f is then always interpreted as field access and outside the module it is interpreted as an accessor proc call.

Routines can be invoked without the () if the call is syntactically a statement. This command invocation syntax also works for expressions, but then only a single argument may follow. This restriction means echo f 1, f 2 is parsed as echo(f(1), f(2)) and not as echo(f(1, f(2))). The method call syntax may be used to provide one more argument in this case:

proc optarg(x: int, y: int = 0): int = x + y proc singlearg(x: int): int = 20*x echo optarg 1, " ", singlearg 2 let fail = optarg 1, optarg 8 let x = optarg(1, optarg 8) let y = 1.optarg optarg 8 assert x == y

The command invocation syntax also can't have complex expressions as arguments. For example: anonymous procedures, if, case or try. Function calls with no arguments still need () to distinguish between a call and the function itself as a first-class value.

Procedures can appear at the top level in a module as well as inside other scopes, in which case they are called nested procs. A nested proc can access local variables from its enclosing scope and if it does so it becomes a closure. Any captured variables are stored in a hidden additional argument to the closure (its environment) and they are accessed by reference by both the closure and its enclosing scope (i.e. any modifications made to them are visible in both places). The closure environment may be allocated on the heap or on the stack if the compiler determines that this would be safe.

Since closures capture local variables by reference it is often not wanted behavior inside loop bodies. See closureScope and capture for details on how to change this behavior.

Unnamed procedures can be used as lambda expressions to pass into other procedures:

var cities = @["Frankfurt", "Tokyo", "New York", "Kyiv"] cities.sort(proc (x, y: string): int = cmp(x.len, y.len))

Procs as expressions can appear both as nested procs and inside top-level executable code. The sugar module contains the => macro which enables a more succinct syntax for anonymous procedures resembling lambdas as they are in languages like JavaScript, C#, etc.

As a special convenience notation that keeps most elements of a regular proc expression, the do keyword can be used to pass anonymous procedures to routines:

var cities = @["Frankfurt", "Tokyo", "New York", "Kyiv"] sort(cities) do (x, y: string) -> int: cmp(x.len, y.len) cities = cities.map do (x: string) -> string: "City of " & x

do is written after the parentheses enclosing the regular proc parameters. The proc expression represented by the do block is appended to the routine call as the last argument. In calls using the command syntax, the do block will bind to the immediately preceding expression rather than the command call.

do with a parameter list or pragma list corresponds to an anonymous proc, however do without parameters or pragmas is treated as a normal statement list. This allows macros to receive both indented statement lists as an argument in inline calls, as well as a direct mirror of Nim's routine syntax.

macroResults.add quote do: if not `ex`: echo `info`, ": Check failed: ", `expString` rpc(router, "add") do (a, b: int) -> int: result = a + b

The func keyword introduces a shortcut for a noSideEffect proc.

func binarySearch[T](a: openArray[T]; elem: T): int

Is short for:

proc binarySearch[T](a: openArray[T]; elem: T): int {.noSideEffect.}

A routine is a symbol of kind: proc, func, method, iterator, macro, template, converter.

A type bound operator is a proc or func whose name starts with = but isn't an operator (i.e. containing only symbols, such as ==). These are unrelated to setters (see Properties), which instead end in =. A type bound operator declared for a type applies to the type regardless of whether the operator is in scope (including if it is private).

var witness* = 0 type Foo[T] = object proc initFoo*(T: typedesc): Foo[T] = discard proc `=destroy`[T](x: var Foo[T]) = witness.inc import foo block: var a = initFoo(int) doAssert witness == 0 doAssert witness == 1 block: var a = initFoo(int) doAssert witness == 1 `=destroy`(a) doAssert witness == 2 doAssert witness == 3

Type bound operators are: =destroy, =copy, =sink, =trace, =deepcopy, =wasMoved, =dup.

These operations can be *overridden* instead of *overloaded*. This means that the implementation is automatically lifted to structured types. For instance, if the type T has an overridden assignment operator =, this operator is also used for assignments of the type seq[T].

Since these operations are bound to a type, they have to be bound to a nominal type for reasons of simplicity of implementation; this means an overridden deepCopy for ref T is really bound to T and not to ref T. This also means that one cannot override deepCopy for both ptr T and ref T at the same time, instead a distinct or object helper type has to be used for one pointer type.

For more details on some of those procs, see Lifetime-tracking hooks.

The following built-in procs cannot be overloaded for reasons of implementation simplicity (they require specialized semantic checking):

```
declared, defined, definedInScope, compiles, sizeof,
is, shallowCopy, getAst, astToStr, spawn, procCall
```

Thus, they act more like keywords than like ordinary identifiers; unlike a keyword however, a redefinition may shadow the definition in the system module. From this list the following should not be written in dot notation x.f since x cannot be type-checked before it gets passed to f:

```
declared, defined, definedInScope, compiles, getAst, astToStr
```

The type of a parameter may be prefixed with the var keyword:

proc divmod(a, b: int; res, remainder: var int) = res = a div b remainder = a mod b var x, y: int divmod(8, 5, x, y) assert x == 1 assert y == 3

In the example, res and remainder are var parameters. Var parameters can be modified by the procedure and the changes are visible to the caller. The argument passed to a var parameter has to be an l-value. Var parameters are implemented as hidden pointers. The above example is equivalent to:

proc divmod(a, b: int; res, remainder: ptr int) = res[] = a div b remainder[] = a mod b var x, y: int divmod(8, 5, addr(x), addr(y)) assert x == 1 assert y == 3

In the examples, var parameters or pointers are used to provide two return values. This can be done in a cleaner way by returning a tuple:

proc divmod(a, b: int): tuple[res, remainder: int] = (a div b, a mod b) var t = divmod(8, 5) assert t.res == 1 assert t.remainder == 3

One can use tuple unpacking to access the tuple's fields:

var (x, y) = divmod(8, 5) assert x == 1 assert y == 3

**Note**: var parameters are never necessary for efficient parameter passing. Since non-var parameters cannot be modified the compiler is always free to pass arguments by reference if it considers it can speed up execution.

A proc, converter, or iterator may return a var type which means that the returned value is an l-value and can be modified by the caller:

var g = 0 proc writeAccessToG(): var int = result = g writeAccessToG() = 6 assert g == 6

It is a static error if the implicitly introduced pointer could be used to access a location beyond its lifetime:

proc writeAccessToG(): var int = var g = 0 result = g

For iterators, a component of a tuple return type can have a var type too:

iterator mpairs(a: var seq[string]): tuple[key: int, val: var string] = for i in 0..a.high: yield (i, a[i])

In the standard library every name of a routine that returns a var type starts with the prefix m per convention.

Memory safety for returning by var T is ensured by a simple borrowing rule: If result does not refer to a location pointing to the heap (that is in result = X the X involves a ptr or ref access) then it has to be derived from the routine's first parameter:

proc forward[T](x: var T): var T = result = x proc p(param: var int): var int = var x: int result = forward(x)

In other words, the lifetime of what result points to is attached to the lifetime of the first parameter and that is enough knowledge to verify memory safety at the call site.

Later versions of Nim can be more precise about the borrowing rule with a syntax like:

proc foo(other: Y; container: var X): var T from container

Here var T from container explicitly exposes that the location is derived from the second parameter (called 'container' in this case). The syntax var T from p specifies a type varTy[T, 2] which is incompatible with varTy[T, 1].

**Note**: This section describes the current implementation. This part of the language specification will be changed. See https://github.com/nim-lang/RFCs/issues/230 for more information.

The return value is represented inside the body of a routine as the special result variable. This allows for a mechanism much like C++'s "named return value optimization" (NRVO). NRVO means that the stores to result inside p directly affect the destination dest in let/var dest = p(args) (definition of dest) and also in dest = p(args) (assignment to dest). This is achieved by rewriting dest = p(args) to p'(args, dest) where p' is a variation of p that returns void and receives a hidden mutable parameter representing result.

Informally:

proc p(): BigT = ... var x = p() x = p() proc p(result: var BigT) = ... var x; p(x) p(x)

Let T's be p's return type. NRVO applies for T if sizeof(T) >= N (where N is implementation dependent), in other words, it applies for "big" structures.

If p can raise an exception, NRVO applies regardless. This can produce observable differences in behavior:

type BigT = array[16, int] proc p(raiseAt: int): BigT = for i in 0..high(result): if i == raiseAt: raise newException(ValueError, "interception") result[i] = i proc main = var x: BigT try: x = p(8) except ValueError: doAssert x == [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] main()

The compiler can produce a warning in these cases, however this behavior is turned off by default. It can be enabled for a section of code via the warning[ObservableStores] and push/pop pragmas. Take the above code as an example:

{.push warning[ObservableStores]: on.} main() {.pop.}

The [] subscript operator for arrays/openarrays/sequences can be overloaded for any type (with some exceptions) by defining a routine with the name [].

type Foo = object data: seq[int] proc `[]`(foo: Foo, i: int): int = result = foo.data[i] let foo = Foo(data: @[1, 2, 3]) echo foo[1]

Assignment to subscripts can also be overloaded by naming a routine []=, which has precedence over assigning to the result of [].

type Foo = object data: seq[int] proc `[]`(foo: Foo, i: int): int = result = foo.data[i] proc `[]=`(foo: var Foo, i: int, val: int) = foo.data[i] = val var foo = Foo(data: @[1, 2, 3]) echo foo[1] foo[1] = 5 echo foo.data echo foo[1]

Overloads of the subscript operator cannot be applied to routine or type symbols themselves, as this conflicts with the syntax for instantiating generic parameters, i.e. foo[int](1, 2, 3) or Foo[int].

Procedures always use static dispatch. Methods use dynamic dispatch. For dynamic dispatch to work on an object it should be a reference type.

type Expression = ref object of RootObj Literal = ref object of Expression x: int PlusExpr = ref object of Expression a, b: Expression method eval(e: Expression): int {.base.} = raise newException(CatchableError, "Method without implementation override") method eval(e: Literal): int = return e.x method eval(e: PlusExpr): int = result = eval(e.a) + eval(e.b) proc newLit(x: int): Literal = new(result) result.x = x proc newPlus(a, b: Expression): PlusExpr = new(result) result.a = a result.b = b echo eval(newPlus(newPlus(newLit(1), newLit(2)), newLit(4)))

In the example the constructors newLit and newPlus are procs because they should use static binding, but eval is a method because it requires dynamic binding.
