---
title: "1,2-Diaminopropane"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1,2-Diaminopropane
domain: antioxidant
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: antioxidant
fetched: 2026-07-09
---

# 1,2-Diaminopropane

**1,2-Diaminopropane** (**propane-1,2-diamine**) is organic compound with the formula CH3CH(NH2)CH2NH2. A colorless liquid, it is the simplest chiral diamine.

## Preparation

Industrially, this compound is synthesized by the ammonolysis of 1,2-dichloropropane:

CH

3

CHClCH

2

Cl + 4 NH

3

→ CH

3

CH(NH

2

)CH

2

NH

2

+ 2 NH

4

Cl

This preparation allows for the use of waste chloro-organic compounds to form useful amines using inexpensive and readily available ammonia.

The racemic mixture of this chiral compound may be separated into enantiomers by conversion into the diastereomeric tartaric acid ammonium salt. After purification of the diastereomer, the diamine can be regenerated by treatment of the ammonium salt with sodium hydroxide. Alternate reagents for chiral resolution include *N*-*p*-toluenesulfonylaspartic acid, *N*-benzenesulfonylaspartic acid, or *N*-benzoylglutamic acid.

## Uses

1,2-Diaminopropane is used in the synthesis of *N*,*N′*-disalicylidene-1,2-propanediamine, a salen-type ligand, usually abbreviated as salpn, that is used as a metal deactivating additive in motor oils.

1,2-Diaminopropane forms coordination complexes similar to tris(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III). Owing to the presence of the methyl groups, [Co(pn)3]3+ can exist as 24 stereoisomers.

Two chiral 1,2-diamines are 1,2-diaminocyclohexane and 2,3-diaminobutane. The chiral diastereomers of those diamines are C2-symmetric.
