---
title: "List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1887 (part 2/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/50_&_51_Vict.
domain: court-of-session
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: court of session
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 2/3
---

# List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1887

Newark and Ollerton Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxix

5 July 1887

An Act for incorporating the Newark and Ollerton Railway Company and authorising them to make and maintain the Newark and Ollerton Railway and for other purposes.

Edinburgh Northern Tramways Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxx

5 July 1887

An Act to enable the Edinburgh Northern Tramways Company to make and maintain additional Tramways and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Edinburgh Corporation Order Confirmation Act 1932

(

22 & 23 Geo. 5

. c. vii))

Wakefield Corporation Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxi

5 July 1887

An Act to make further and better provision in relation to the Water Supply Health Local Government and improvement of the borough of Wakefield in the West Riding of the county of York and to empower the Corporation of that borough to create and issue Corporation Stock and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

West Yorkshire Act 1980

(c. xiv))

Dundee Street Tramways, Recreation Grounds, Police and Improvement Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxii

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Dundee Police Commissioners to abandon portions of their existing tramways, and to make a new tramway; to construct a sea wall or bulwark, and other works; to take and appropriate lands for a public park; and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Dundee Corporation (Consolidated Powers) Order Confirmation Act 1957

(

6 & 7 Eliz. 2

. c. iv))

Holywell and District Water Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxiii

5 July 1887

An Act for incorporating the Holywell and District Water Company and empowering them to construct Waterworks and supply Water and for other purposes.

Pier and Harbour Orders Confirmation (No. 1) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxiv

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made by the Board of Trade under the General Pier and Harbour Act, 1861,

relating to Aberdeen, Alum Bay, Greenock, Sandown, and Teignmouth.

Aberdeen Harbour Order 1887

Order for amending the Aberdeen Harbour Act, 1879;

and for conferring further powers on the Aberdeen Harbour Commissioners.

Alum Bay Pier Order 1887

Order for the Construction, Maintenance, and Regulation of a Pier and Works at Alum Bay, in the Parish of Freshwater, in the Isle of Wight and County of Southampton.

Greenock Harbour Order 1887

Order for amending the Greenock Port and Harbours Acts, 1866 to 1884.

Sandown Pier Order 1887

Order for extending the time and giving further powers for construction of Works under The Sandown Pier Order, 1874.

Teignmouth Quays Order 1887

Order for the Construction of New Quays in the River Teign and other Works in connexion therewith at West Teignmouth in the County of Devon.

Local Government Board (Ireland) Provisional Order Confirmation (Limerick Waterworks) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxv

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order of the Local Government Board for Ireland relating to Waterworks in the City of Limerick.

Limerick Waterworks Provisional Order 1887

Limerick Waterworks. Provisional Order.

Commons Regulation (Ewer) Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxvi

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order for the Regulation of Ewer Common, situated in the parish of Alverstoke, in the county of Southampton, in pursuance of a report of the Land Commissioners for England.

Ewer Common Order 1887

Provisional Order for the Regulation of Ewer Common.

Commons Regulation (Laindon) Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxvii

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order for the Regulation of Lain don Common, situated in the parish of Laindon, in the county of Essex, in pursuance of a report from the Land Commissioners for England.

Laindon Common Order 1887

Provisional Order for the Regulation of Laindon Common.

Surrey and Hants District Waterworks Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxviii

5 July 1887

An Act for dissolving the Farnborough (Surrey and Hants) District Waterworks Company Limited and re-incorporating the members thereof with others and for enabling them to construct Waterworks and supply Water and for other purposes.

Hull, Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxix

5 July 1887

An Act for extending the periods limited for the compulsory purchase of lands for and for the completion of certain of the authorised works of the Hull Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company and for the abandonment of other of their authorised works for authorising the construction of a new railway by the Company and for other purposes.

Bexley Heath Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxx

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Bexley Heath Railway Company to extend their railway to Blackheath to abandon a portion of their authorised railway and for other purposes.

North British Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxi

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the North British Railway Company to make a Railway in the county of Linlithgow; to amalgamate with the Company the undertaking of the Glasgow City and District Railway Company; to subscribe to the undertaking of the Anstruther and St. Andrews Railway Company; to amend various Acts; and for other purposes.

Local Government Board's Provisional Order Confirmation (Poor Law) (No. 3) Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxii

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm an Order of the Local Government Board under the provisions of the Divided Parishes and Poor Law Amendment Act, 1876,

as amended and extended by the Poor Law Act, 1879,

relating to the Parishes of Aldington, Saint Leonard, Hythe, and West Hythe.

(Repealed by

County of Kent Act 1981

(c. xviii))

Aldington, Saint Leonard, Hythe, and West Hythe Order 1887

East Ashford, Elham, and Romney Marsh Unions.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (Gas) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxiii

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board under the provisions of the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870,

the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870, Amendment Act, 1873,

and the Public Health Act, 1875,

relating to the Local Government Districts of East Dereham and Meltham.

East Dereham Gas Order 1887

Provisional Order under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870,

and the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870, Amendment Act, 1873.

Meltham Gas Order 1887

Provisional Order under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 2) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxiv

5 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board relating to the Local Government District of Abergele and Pensarn, the District of Bilston, the Boroughs of Bradford (Yorks.) and Evesham, the Improvement Act District of Leek, the Local Government Districts of Leyton and Wanstead, and the Borough of Ramsgate.

Abergele and Pensarn Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering a Confirming Act.

Bilston Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Bilston Improvement Act, 1850.

Bradford (Yorks.) Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Bradford Corporation Act, 1866.

Evesham Order 1887

Provisional Order for altcring a Local Act.

Leek Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Leek Improvement Act, 1855.

Leyton and Wanstead Order 1887

Provisional Order for extending the Local Government Districts of Leyton and Wanstead.

Ramsgate Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering a Local Act

and a Confirming Act.

Edinburgh Public Library Assessment Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxv

5 July 1887

An Act to provide for the levying of the Assessments under the Public Libraries (Scotland) Acts in the City of Edinburgh; and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Edinburgh Corporation Order Confirmation Act 1932

(

22 & 23 Geo. 5

. c. vii))

Coventry and District Tramways Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxvi

5 July 1887

An Act for authorising the release of the balance of the deposit fund remaining deposited as security for the completion of certain of the tramways authorised by the Coventry and District Tramways Act 1880.

(Repealed by

West Midlands County Council Act 1980

(c. xi))

Burnard and Alger's Cattedown Wharves Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxvii

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the levying of rates at the Cattedown Wharves Plymouth and for other purposes.

Blyth and Cowpen Gas Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxviii

5 July 1887

An Act to re-incorporate with further powers the Blyth and Cowpen Gaslight Company Limited.

Sutton District Waterworks Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. lxxxix

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Sutton District Water Company to raise further capital and for other purposes.

Dundalk Gas Company Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xc

5 July 1887

An Act to dissolve the Dundalk Gas Company Limited and to incorporate a new Company; and for other purposes.

Walton-on-Thames and Weybridge Gas Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xci

5 July 1887

An Act to enable the Walton-on-Thames and Weybridge Gas Company to acquire additional land and to erect and maintain additional works to raise further capital and for other purposes.

Dundalk Commissioners (Gas) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcii

5 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Town Commissioners of Dundalk to apply their funds and to raise further funds for the purchase of the works and undertaking of the Dundalk Gas Company; and for other purposes.

Great Northern Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xciii

5 July 1887

An Act to confer further powers upon the Great Northern Railway Company with respect to their own undertaking and undertakings in which they are jointly interested and upon the Halifax High Level and North and South Junction Railway Company with respect to their undertaking and for other purposes.

Chelsea Waterworks Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xciv

5 July 1887

An Act to enable the Governor and Company of Chelsea Waterworks to dispose of certain lands and for other purposes.

New Shoreham Harbour Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcv

5 July 1887

An Act for empowering the Shoreham Harbour Trustees to raise money by the creation and issue of Debenture Stock and for amending the New Shoreham Harbour Acts; and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Shoreham Harbour Act 1926

(

16 & 17 Geo. 5

. c. xlvii))

Flamborough Head Tramways Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcvi

5 July 1887

An Act for incorporating the Flamborough Head Tramways Company and empowering them to construct Tramways and other works in the East Riding of the County of York and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Flamborough Head Tramways (Abandonment) Act 1891

(

54 & 55 Vict.

c. cxxviii))

Christchurch Charter Amendment Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcvii

5 July 1887

An Act to correct an Error in the Charter of Incorporation granted to the Borough of Christchurch in the County of Southampton.

Kilsyth and Bonnybridge Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcviii

12 July 1887

An Act to revive and extend the powers granted to the Kilsyth and Bonnybridge Railway Company for the compulsory purchase of certain lands and to extend the time for the completion of their authorised railways to enable the Company to raise further capital and for other purposes.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 3) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. xcix

12 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board relating to the Local Government District of Alverstoke, the Boroughs of Dewsbury, Great Torrington, Halifax, and Nottingham, and the Rural Sanitary District of the Saint Thomas Union.

Alverstoke Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Sanitary Authority for the Urban Sanitary District of Alverstoke to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Dewsbury Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Urban Sanitary Authority for the Borough of Dewsbury to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Great Torrington Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Urban Sanitary Authority for the Borough of Great Torrington to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Halifax Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Urban Sanitary Authority for the Borough of Halifax to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Nottingham Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Urban Sanitary Authority for the Borough of Nottingham to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Saint Thomas Union Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Sanitary Authority for the Rural Sanitary District of the Saint Thomas Union to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Oyster and Mussel Fisheries Order Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. c

12 July 1887

An Act to confirm an Order made by the Board of Trade under the Sea Fisheries Act, 1868,

relating to Poole (Wareham Channel).

Poole (Wareham Channel) Fishery Order 1887

Order for the establishment and maintenance by the Fowley Oyster Fishery Company, Limited, of a Several Oyster and Mussel Fishery in the Wareham Channel at Poole, in the County of Dorset.

Metropolis (Cable Street, Shadwell) Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. ci

12 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order of one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State for the improvement of an unhealthy area at Shadwell within the Metropolis.

Cable Street, Shadwell Order 1887

The Artizans and Labourers Dwellings Improvement Acts, 1875-1885. The Metropolis (Cable Street, Shadwell) Improvement, 1886. Provisional Order.

Metropolis (Shelton Street, St. Giles) Provisional Order Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cii

12 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order of one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State for the improvement of an unhealthy area at Saint Giles-in-the-Fields within the Metropolis.

Shelton Street, St. Giles Order 1887

The Artizans and Labourers Dwellings Improvement Acts, 1875-1885. The Metropolis (Shelton Street, St. Giles) Improvement, 1886. Provisional Order.

Kenmare Junction Railway Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. ciii

12 July 1887

An Act to increase the baronial guarantee authorised by the Kenmare Junction Railway Act 1884;

to extend the time for the purchase of lands and completion of the railway; and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

Kenmare Junction Railway (Abandonment) Act 1890

(

53 & 54 Vict.

c. xlviii))

Witham Drainage (Hobhole Sluice) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. civ

12 July 1887

An Act to authorise the General Commissioners for Drainage by the River With am to widen and improve Hobhole Sluice and to confer further powers upon those Commissioners and upon the District Commissioners under the Witham Drainage Acts and for other purposes.

City of London and Southwark Subway (Kennington Extensions, &c.) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cv

12 July 1887

An Act to empower the City of London and Southwark Subway Company to extend their authorised Subway from the Elephant and Castle to Kennington and Stockwell and for other purposes.

Metropolitan Board of Works (Various Powers) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cvi

12 July 1887

An A ct to confer further Powers on the Metropolitan Board of Works as to Streets Bridges and open Spaces as to the Drainage of a detached portion of Clerkenwell Parish and for other purposes.

Weston-super-Mare Improvement Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cvii

12 July 1887

An Act for authorising the Weston-super-Mare Improvement Commissioners to acquire additional lands to construct additional works and to raise further Moneys for the purposes of their Water undertaking and to make further and better provision for the Improvement Health and good Government of the Urban Sanitary District of Weston-super-Mare and for other purposes.

Merionethshire Railway (Abandonment) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cviii

12 July 1887

An Act for the abandonment of the railways authorised by the Merionethshire Railway Act 1871.

Manchester Ship Canal Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. cix

12 July 1887

An Act to enable the Manchester Ship Canal Company to raise a portion of their Capital by means of preference shares.

(Repealed by

Manchester Ship Canal Harbour Revision Order 2009

(

SI 2009

/2579))

South-eastern Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cx

12 July 1887

An Act for conferring further powers with reference to the South-eastern Railway Company's undertaking and the undertakings of other Companies and for other purposes.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 6) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxi

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board relating to the City of Bath, the Local Government Districts of Birstal and Dalton-in-Furness, the City of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and the Borough of Southport.

Bath Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering a Local Act

and a Confirming Act.

Birstal Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Birstal Local Board Act, 1872.

Dalton-in-Furness Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Dalton-in-Furness District Local Board Act, 1878.

Newcastle-upon-Tyne Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering certain Local Acts.

Southport Order 1887

Provisional Order for partially repealing and altering certain Local

and Confirming Acts.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 8) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxii

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board relating to the Borough of Burnley, the Urban Sanitary District of Folkestone, the Local Government District of Garw and Ogmore, the Rural Sanitary District of the Newport (Mon.) Union, and the Borough of Stafford.

Burnley Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering certain Local Acts.

Folkestone Order 1887

Provisional Order for partially repealing and altering the Folkestone Improvement Act, 1855.

Garw and Ogmore Order 1887

Provisional Order for constituting a Local Government District, and for other purposes.

Newport (Mon.) Order 1887

Provisional Order to enable the Sanitary Authority for the Rural Sanitary District of the Newport (Mon.) Union to put in force the Compulsory Clauses of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts.

Stafford Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering a Confirming Act.

Local Government Board (Ireland) Provisional Order (Killiney and Ballybrack) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxiii

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order of the Local Government Board for Ireland constituting the Township of Killiney and Ballybrack an Urban Sanitary District.

Killiney and Ballybrack Township Provisional Order 1887

Killiney and Ballybrack Township. Provisional Order.

Whitehaven Harbour and Dock Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxiv

19 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Trustees of the Town and Harbour of Whitehaven to make arrangements with their Bondholders and other Creditors and for other purposes.

Trent (Burton-upon-Trent and Humber) Navigation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxv

19 July 1887

An Act to provide for the improvement and maintenance of the Navigation of the River Trent from Wilden Ferry in the counties of Derby and Leicester or one of them to Gainsborough in the county of Lincoln and for other purposes.

Isle of Wight Central Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxvi

19 July 1887

An Act to amalgamate the undertakings of the Cowes and Newport the Isle of Wight (Newport Junction) and the Ryde and Newport Railway Companies; and for other purposes.

Pudsey Gas Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxvii

19 July 1887

An Act to enable the Pudsey Coal Gas Company to raise further capital; and for other purposes.

Municipal Corporation of Belfast Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxviii

19 July 1887

An Act to amend the Municipal Corporations (Ireland) Act

so far as relates to the Borough of Belfast.

Education Department Provisional Order Confirmation (Christchurch) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxix

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order made by the Education Department under the Elementary Education Act, 1870,

to enable the School Board for Christchurch (extra municipal), Monmouth, to put in force the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845,

and the Acts amending the same.

Christchurch Order 1887

The School Board for Christchurch (Extra Municipal), County of Monmouth. Provisional Order for putting in force the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845.

Education Department Provisional Order Confirmation (London) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxx

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order made by the Education Department under the Elementary Education Act, 1870,

to enable the School Board for London to put in force the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845,

and the Acts amending the same.

London Order 1887

The School Board for London. Provisional Order for putting in force the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845.

Potter's Patent Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxi

19 July 1887

An Act for rendering valid certain Letters Patent granted to Richard Potter for Improvements in Furnaces for melting Glass.

Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxii

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders of the Local Government Board relating to the Local Government District of Buxton, the Borough of Halifax, and the Local Government Districts of Otley, Southwick, and Sowerby Bridge.

Buxton Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Buxton Local Board Act, 1873.

Halifax Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering certain Local Acts.

Otley Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Otley Local Board Act, 1885.

Southwick Order 1887

Provisional Order for diminishing the Local Government District of Southwick.

Sowerby Bridge Order 1887

Provisional Order for altering the Sowerby Bridge Gas Act, 1861.

Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 2) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxiii

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made by the Board of Trade under the Tramways Act, 1870,

relating to Dudley, Netherton, Old Hill, and Cradley Tramways, Newport Pagnell and District Tramways, Norwich Tramways, Wolverton and Stony Stratford Tramways (Deanshanger Extension), and Worcester Tramways.

Dudley, Netherton Old Hill and Cradley Tramways Order 1887

Order authorising the construction of Tramways in the parishes of Dudley in the county of Worcester and Rowley Regis in the county of Stafford.

Newport Pagnell and District Tramways Order 1887

Order authorising the construction of Tramways in the parishes of Newport Pagnell Lathbury Sherington Emberton and Olney all in the county of Buckingham.

Norwich Tramways Order 1887

Order authorising the construction of Tramways in the city and county of the city of Norwich and the parish of Thorpe Saint Andrew in the county of Norfolk.

Wolverton and Stony Stratford (Deanshanger Extension) Tramways Order 1887

Order authorising the construction of Tramways in the parishes of Stony Stratford in the county of Buckingham and Cosgrove and Passenham in the county of Northampton.

Worcester Tramways Order 1887

Order authorising the Construction of Additional Tramways in the City of Worcester.

Water Orders Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxiv

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made by the Board of Trade under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870,

relating to Beverley Water, Freshwater and Yarmouth Water, Hoylake and West Kirby Water, Poole Water, and West Lulworth Water.

Beverley Waterworks Order 1887

Order empowering the Beverley Waterworks Company to raise additional Capital.

Freshwater and Yarmouth Water Order 1887

Order conferring powers for the construction and maintenance of Waterworks, and the supply of Water within the parishes of Freshwater, Yarmouth, Thorley and Shalfleet, in the Isle of Wight in the county of Southampton.

Hoylake and West Kirby Water Order 1887

Order empowering the Hoylake and West Kirby Gas and Water Company Limited to raise additional capital.

Poole Water Order 1887

Order empowering the Poole Waterworks Company to raise additional Capital.

West Lulworth Water Order 1887

Order empowering Reginald Joseph Weld and his successors to maintain Waterworks and to supply Water within the Parish of West Lulworth in the County of Dorset.

Gas Orders Confirmation Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxv

19 July 1887

An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made by the Board of Trade under the Gas and Water Works Facilities Act, 1870,

relating to Bedford Gas, Long Melford Gas, Musselburgh Gas, Penmaenmawr Gas, and Portsea Gas.

Bedford Gas Order 1887

Order empowering the Bedford Gas Light Company to raise additional capital.

Long Melford Gas Order 1887

Order conferring powers for the maintenance and continuance of Gasworks, and for the manufacture and supply of Gas in the parish of Long Melford in the county of Suffolk.

Musselburgh Gas Order 1887

Order empowering the Musselburgh Gas Light Company to maintain and continue gasworks, and to make and supply gas in the burgh of Musselburgh, and in other parts of the parish of Inveresk in the county of Mid-Lothian.

Penmaenmawr Gas Order 1887

Order conferring powers for the maintenance and continuance of gasworks and for the manufacture and supply of gas in the local board district of Dwygyfylchi in the county of Carnarvon.

Portsea Gas Order 1887

Order empowering the Portsea Island Gaslight Company to purchase additional lands to construct and maintain additional works and for other purposes.

Liskeard and Caradon Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxvi

19 July 1887

An Act for conferring further powers on the Liskeard and Caradon Railway Company in relation to their undertaking and for authorising arrangements between them and other railway companies and for other purposes.

Belfast Main Drainage Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxvii

19 July 1887

An Act to extend the powers of the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Belfast for the purification of the River Lagan and for the construction of works in connexion therewith and for other purposes.

Tunbridge Wells Gas Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxviii

19 July 1887

An Act for the granting of further powers to the Tunbridge Wells Gas Company.

Cathcart District Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxix

19 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Cathcart District Railway Company to construct a railway from their authorised railway at New Cathcart to join the Caledonian Railway at Strathbungo to revive the powers and extend the time for the compulsory purchase of lands for and to extend the time for the completion of their authorised railway No. 1 to abandon their authorised railway No. 3 to raise further capital and for other purposes.

Furness Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxx

19 July 1887

An Act for conferring further powers on the Furness Railway Company in relation to their undertaking and for other purposes.

London and North Western Railway Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxxi

19 July 1887

An Act for conferring further powers upon the London and North-Western Railway Company in relation to their own undertaking and other undertakings in which they are interested jointly with other companies and also for conferring powers upon the Great Western Railway Company the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company and other railway companies in relation to such other undertakings and for amalgamating with their undertaking the undertaking of the Cromford and High Peak Railway Company and for other purposes.

Bradford Corporation (Various Powers) Act 1887

(repealed)

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxxii

19 July 1887

An Act to enable the mayor aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Bradford to establish and maintain a "Conditioning House" for ascertaining and certifying on behalf of persons so desiring the weight length quality and condition of articles of merchandise used in the Bradford worsted trade and the true weight character quality and condition of wools; to authorize the transfer of the Bradford Fever Hospital to the said mayor aldermen and burgesses; and for other purposes.

(Repealed by

West Yorkshire Act 1980

(c. xiv))

Freshwater, Yarmouth and Newport Railway (Deviations) Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxxiii

19 July 1887

An Act to authorise the Freshwater Yarmouth and Newport Railway Company to deviate portions of their authorised railway and for other purposes.

Newport Waterworks Act 1887

50 & 51 Vict. c. cxxxiv

19 July 1887
