---
title: "List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1814 (part 2/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/55_Geo._3
domain: court-of-session
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: court of session
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 2/4
---

# List of acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1814

Excise and Customs Act 1815

(

55 Geo. 3

. c. 66))

Accounts of Colonial Revenues Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 184

30 July 1814

An Act for the effectual Examination of Accounts of the Receipt and Expenditure of the Colonial Revenues in the Islands of Ceylon, Mauritius, Malta, Trinidad, and in the Settlements of the Cape of Good Hope, for Five Years.

(Repealed by

Statute Law Revision Act 1873

(

36 & 37 Vict.

c. 91))

Exportation (No. 5) Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 185

30 July 1814

An Act to allow a Bounty on the Exportation from Great Britain of British-made Cordage.

(Repealed by

Customs Law Repeal Act 1825

(

6 Geo. 4

. c. 105))

Apprehension of Offenders Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 186

30 July 1814

An Act for the more easy apprehending and trying of Offenders, escaping from one Part of the United Kingdom to the other.

(Repealed by

Statute Law Revision Act 1873

(

36 & 37 Vict.

c. 91))

Depredations on the Thames Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 187

30 July 1814

An Act to revive and continue, until the First Day of June One thousand eight hundred and twenty and to amend several Acts for the more effectual Prevention of Depredations on the River Thames, and its Vicinity.

(Repealed by

Police Magistrates, Metropolitan Act 1821

(

1 & 2 Geo. 4

. c. 118))

Exchequer Bills (No. 4) Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 188

30 July 1814

An Act for enabling His Majesty to raise the Sum of Three Millions for the Service of Great Britain, and for applying the Sum of Two hundred thousand Pounds British Currency for the Service of Ireland.

(Repealed by

Statute Law Revision Act 1873

(

36 & 37 Vict.

c. 91))

Militia Pay (Great Britain) Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 189

30 July 1814

An Act to defray the Charge of the Pay, Clothing and Contingent Expences of the Disembodied Militia in Great Britain, and of the Miners of Cornwall and Devon; and for granting Allowances in certain Cases to Subaltern Officers, Adjutants, Surgeons' Mates and Serjeant Majors of Militia, until the Twenty fifth Day of June One thousand eight hundred and fifteen.

(Repealed by

Statute Law Revision Act 1873

(

36 & 37 Vict.

c. 91))

Land Tax Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. 190

23 July 1814

An Act for appointing Commissioners for carrying into Execution an Act of this Session of Parliament,

for granting to His Majesty a Duty on Pensions and Offices in England; and an Act made in the Thirty eighth Year of His present Majesty,

for granting an Aid to His Majesty by a Land Tax, to be raised in Great Britain, for the Service of the Year One thousand seven hundred and ninety eight.

(Repealed by

Statute Law Revision Act 1873

(

36 & 37 Vict.

c. 91))

1. Actions Against Spiritual Persons Act 1813 (54 Geo. 3. c. 6)
2. Benefices (England) Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 84)
3. Exportation and Importation Act 1813 (53 Geo. 3. c. 67)
4. Customs (No. 3) Act 1809 (49 Geo. 3. c. 98)
5. Importation Act 1733 (7 Geo. 2. c. 18)
6. Gold Currency, etc. Act 1812 (52 Geo. 3. c. 50)
7. Copyright Act 1798 (38 Geo. 3. c. 71)
8. Marie-Galante, a dependency of Guadeloupe.
9. Sint Eustatius.
10. Trade During Hostilities Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 57)
11. Colonial Leave of Absence Act 1782 (22 Geo. 3. c. 75)
12. Sail Cloth Act 1745 (19 Geo. 2. c. 27)
13. Duties on Cape Wines Act 1813 (53 Geo. 3. c. 84)
14. Exportation Act 1697 (9 Will. 3. c. 40)
15. Exportation (No. 2) Act 1788 (28 Geo. 3. c. 38)
16. Bridges Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 59)
17. Poor Relief Act 1601 (43 Eliz. 1. c. 2)
18. Statute of Artificers 1562 (5 Eliz. 1. c. 4)
19. Restriction on Cash Payments Act 1803 (44 Geo. 3. c. 1)
20. The United Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies is better known as the East India Company.
21. Paper Duties Act 1794 (34 Geo. 3. c. 20)
22. Burying in Woollen Act 1678 (30 Cha. 2. c. 3)
23. Burying in Woollen Act 1680 (32 Cha. 2. c. 1)
24. Highways Act 1773 (13 Geo. 3. c. 78)
25. Seamen's Wages Remittance Act 1793 (33 Geo. 3. c. 23 (I))
26. Insolvent Debtors (Ireland) Act 1813 (53 Geo. 3. c. 138)
27. Burning of Land Act 1743 (17 Geo. 2. c. 10 (I))
28. Parish Clerks and Churches Act 1759 (33 Geo. 2. c. 11 (I))
29. Recovery of Tithes and Parish Clerks Act 1749 (23 Geo. 2. c. 12 (I))
30. Stamp Duties, etc. (Ireland) Act 1812 (52 Geo. 3. c. 87)
31. Hop Trade Act 1800 (39 & 40 Geo. 3. c. 81)
32. Importation (No. 4) Act 1806 (46 Geo. 3. c. 117)
33. Shipwrecked Mariners Act 1721 (8 Geo. 1. c. 17)
34. Stage Coaches, etc. (Ireland) Act 1810 (50 Geo. 3. c. 32)
35. Queensferry Ferry Improvement Act 1809 (49 Geo. 3. c. lxxxiii)
36. National Debt Act 1814 (54 Geo. 3. c. 76)
37. Assessed Taxes Act 1812 (52 Geo. 3. c. 93)
38. Isle of Man Harbours Act 1771 (11 Geo. 3. c. 52)
39. Hackney Coach Fares Act 1808 (48 Geo. 3. c. 87)
40. Agent General for Volunteers, etc. Act 1812 (52 Geo. 3. c. 152)
41. Gunpowder Act 1772 (12 Geo. 3. c. 61)
42. Houses of Parliament Act 1806 (46 Geo. 3. c. 89)
43. Aliens Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 155)
44. Yeomanry and Volunteer Cavalry Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 121)
45. Militia (Ireland) Act 1809 (49 Geo. 3. c. 120)
46. Malta Act 1801 (41 Geo. 3. (U.K.) c. 103)
47. Duties on Malt, etc. Act 1813 (54 Geo. 3. c. 2)
48. Land Tax Act 1797 (38 Geo. 3. c. 5)

### Local acts

Short title

Citation

Royal assent

Long title

Solihull, Kenilworth and Stonebridge Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xv

29 March 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of Two Acts of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from the Warwick Road near Solihull to the Guide Post in Kenilworth, and from Stonebridge, to meet the aforesaid Road at Balsall Common, in the County of Warwick, so far as respects the said Road from Stonebridge to Balsall Common, and from thence to the said Town of Kenilworth.

Woodbridge and Eye Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xvi

19 April 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from Woodbridge to Eye, in the County of Suffolk; and for repairing certain other Roads to communicate therewith.

(Repealed by

Statute Law (Repeals) Act 2008

(c. 12))

Roads from Cardington and from Roxton Hill Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xvii

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of Two Acts, passed in the Twelfth

and Thirty third

Years of His present Majesty, for repairing the Road from the Parish of Cardington to the great Northern Road near Temsford Bridge in the County of Bedford; and for making and maintaining a Road branching out of the same at Roxton Hill, to the South End of the Turnpike Road leading from Bedford to Kimbolton, in the County of Huntingdon.

Ashford and Maidstone Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xviii

4 May 1814

An Act for repairing the Road from Barrow Hill in Ashford, to a Place called New England, in the Parish of Hollingborne, and for making a new Road thence to East Lane, in the Town of Maidstone, all in the County of Kent.

(Repealed by

Ashford and Maidstone Road Act 1836

(

6 & 7 Will. 4

. c. l))

Cockerton Bridge and Staindrop Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xix

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from Cockerton Bridge to Staindrop, in the County of Durham.

Gosport Improvement Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xx

4 May 1814

An Act for watching, lighting and cleansing the Town of Gosport in the County of Southampton; and for amending and rendering more effectual an Act paled in the Third Year of His present Majesty,

for better paving the Streets and preventing Nuisances and Annoyances in the said Town.

South Molton Roads Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxi

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of several Acts of His late and present Majesty, for repairing certain Roads leading from South Molton, in the County of Devon.

(Repealed by

Southmolton Roads (Devon) Act 1839

(

2 & 3 Vict.

c. xlix))

Road from Lyne Bridge Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxii

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Roads from Lyne Bridge, through Longtown, to the Scotch Dyke, and from Longtown to the Bridge over the River Sark, in the County of Cumberland, and for repairing certain other Roads to communicate therewith.

(Repealed by

Longtown Roads (Cumberland) Act 1830

(

11 Geo. 4 & 1 Will. 4

. c. ix))

Macclesfield Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxiii

4 May 1814

An Act for lighting, watching and regulating the Police within the Borough of Macclesfield, in the County of Chester.

(Repealed by

Macclesfield Improvement Act 1825

(

6 Geo. 4

. c. cxcvi))

Road from Burbage to Narborough Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxiv

4 May 1814

An Act for amending and widening the Road, commencing at or near the Side Gate on the Hinckley and Lutterworth Turnpike Road, in the Parish of Burbage, in the County of Leicester, to the Leicester Turnpike Road, in or near to the Village of Narborough, in the said County.

(Repealed by

Road from Burbage to Narborough Act 1835

(

5 & 6 Will. 4

. c. lxxxix))

Darlington and West Auckland Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxv

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty, for repairing the Roads from Darlington to West Auckland, and several other Roads therein mentioned, in the County of Durham.

Road from Burlington to Llanymynech Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxvi

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of Two Acts of His present Majesty

for repairing the Road from Burlton, through Knockin, to Llanymynech, in the County of Salop, and other Places therein mentioned.

Ashford and Romney Marsh Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxvii

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from the North End of Marsh Lane in Ashford, in the County of Kent, to the End of the Parish of Orlestone, near Stockbridghe, in Romney Marsh, in the said County.

Roads from West Harptree to the Bath and Wells Turnpike Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxviii

4 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty

for repairing the Roads from West Harptry to the Bath and Wells Turnpike Roads, and other Roads therein mentioned, in the County of Somerset; and for repairing certain other Roads to communicate therewith.

(Repealed by

West Harptree Road Act 1853

(

16 & 17 Vict.

c. clxii))

Turnpike Road between North Shields and Morpeth Castle Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxix

4 May 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Road from the Turnpike Road between North Shields and Newcastle upon Tyne, to Morpeth Castle, and for making and maintaining Three several Branches of Road to communicate therewith; all lying in the Counties of Northumberland and Durham.

(Repealed by

North Shields and Morpeth Turnpike Road Act 1852

(

15 & 16 Vict.

c. lxxv))

Selby Ferry and Market Weighton Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xxx

4 May 1814

An Act for continuing the Term and enlarging the Powers of an Act of the Thirty third Year of the Reign of His present Majesty,

for repairing and widening the Road from Selby Ferry, in the Parish of Hemingbrough, to the Town of Market Weighton, in the East Riding of the County of York.

(Repealed by

Selby and Market Weighton Turnpike Road Act 1857

(

20 & 21 Vict.

c. lxv))

Middleton and Bowes Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxi

4 May 1814

An Act for continuing and amending Three Acts, One of His late Majesty,

and Two of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from Middleton Tyas Lane End to Bowes, in the North Riding of the County of York.

Newton Chapel (Manchester) Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxii

4 May 1814

An Act for rebuilding the Chapel of Newton, in the Parish of Manchester, in the County Palatine of Lancaster.

Puttenham Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxiii

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Parish of Puttenham, in the County of Hertford.

Bray Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxiv

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Bray, in the County of Berks.

Bewaldeth Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxv

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Manor of Bewaldeth, in the Parish of Torpenhow, in the County of Cumberland.

Hockwold-cum-Wilton Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxvi

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Township of Hockwold cum Wilton, in the County of Norfolk.

Bewcastle Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxvii

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Highstone Common, in the Parish of Bewcastle, in the County of Cumberland.

Lowestoft Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxviii

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Lowestoft, in the County of Suffolk.

Allonby in Bromfield Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xxxix

4 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Manor of Allonby, in the Parish of Bromfield, in the County of Cumberland.

London Docks Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xl

18 May 1814

An Act for enlarging and amending the Powers and Provisions of the several Acts for making the London Docks.

(Repealed by

London Docks Act 1828

(

9 Geo. 4

. c. cxvi))

St. George's Parish (Middlesex) Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xli

18 May 1814

An Act for amending the Powers and Provisions relating to the Poor's Rates, of an Act of His present Majesty,

for maintaining the Poor, and cleansing the Streets, in the Parish of Saint George, in the County of Middlesex.

(Repealed by

London Government (Borough of Stepney) Order in Council 1901

(

SR&O 1901

/276))

Severn and Wye Valley Railway and Canal Company Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xlii

18 May 1814

An Act for enabling the Severn and Wye Railway and Canal Company to raise a further Sum of Money for the Completion of their Works.

Lewisham Poor Relief and Parochial Rates Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xliii

18 May 1814

An Act for the better Management and Relief of the Poor in the Parish of Lewisham, in the County of Kent, and for better assessing and collecting the Parochial Rates in the said Parish.

(Repealed by

London Government (Borough of Lewisham) Order in Council 1901

(

SR&O 1901

/218))

Forehoe Poor Relief Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xliv

18 May 1814

An Act for amending and more effectually carrying into Execution the Purposes of certain Acts of the Sixteenth,

Twenty third

and Twenty ninth

Years of His present Majesty, for the better Relief and Employment of the Poor within the Hundred of Forehoe, in the County of Norfolk.

(Repealed by

Statute Law (Repeals) Act 2013

(c. 2))

Warwickshire Judges' Lodgings Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xlv

18 May 1814

An Act for providing a convenient House, with suitable Accommodations, for His Majesty's Judges at the Assizes for the Court of Warwick.

(Repealed by

Statute Law (Repeals) Act 1995

(c. 44))

Birmingham Mining and Copper Company Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xlvi

18 May 1814

An Act to enable The Birmingham Mining and Copper Company to sue and be sued in the Name of their Secretary.

Lobley Hill and Burtryford Road and Branches Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xlvii

18 May 1814

An Act for continuing and amending an Act of the Thirty third Year of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from the Turnpike Road between Gateshead and Hexham, near Lobley Hill, in the County of Durham, to Burtry Ford, in the Parish of Stanhope, in the same County, together with several Branches therefrom.

(Repealed by

Lobley Hill and Burtryford Roads (Durham) Act 1837

(

7 Will. 4 & 1 Vict.

c. xvi))

Roads from Swell Wold, Cheltenham and Winchcomb Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xlviii

18 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for amending, widening, altering and repairing the Road from Swell Wold to the Turnpike Road from Tewkesbury to Stow, in the County of Gloucester, and from the Parish of Cheltenham, in the said County of Gloucester, to Sedgborough, in the County of Worcester, and from the Town of Winchcomb, in the said County of Gloucester, to the said Turnpike Road from Tewkesbury to Stow.

(Repealed by

Roads from Swell Wold, Cheltenham and Winchcomb Act 1833

(

3 & 4 Will. 4

. c. xi))

Besselsleigh and Hungerford Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xlix

18 May 1814

An Act to continue the Term and alter and enlarge the Powers of Three Acts of His present Majesty,

for amending the Road from Besselsleigh, through Wantage, to Hungerford, in the County of Berks, and other Roads in the said Acts mentioned, in the said County, and in the County of Wilts.

(Repealed by

Besselsleigh Road Act 1858

(

21 & 22 Vict.

c. xlii))

Road from Swindon to Ramsbury Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. l

18 May 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Turnpike Road from Swindon to or near Knighton Farm, in the Parish of Ramsbury, and from Liddington to the Road leading from Swindon to Marlborough, in the County of Wilts.

Sturry and Herne Bay Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. li

18 May 1814

An Act for amending, widening and keeping in Repair the Road leading from Sturry Street to Herne Bay, in the County of Kent.

Road from Brent Bridge to Plymouth Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lii

18 May 1814

An Act for altering and enlarging the Term and Powers of Three Acts,

made for repairing the High Road leading from Brent Bridge, in the County of Devon, to Gasking Gate, in or near the Borough of Plymouth, in the said County of Devon.

Roads through Lichfield Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. liii

18 May 1814

An Act to continue the Term, and alter and enlarge the Powers of an Act of the Twenty ninth Year of His present Majesty,

for enlarging the Terms of several Acts for repairing the Roads from Coleshill,

through the City of Lichfield,

and the Town of Stone,

to the End of the County of Stafford,

in the Road leading towards Chester, and several other Roads in the said Acts mentioned, in the Counties of Warwick and Stafford, and City and County of the City of Lichfield.

(Repealed by

Road from Coleshill through Lichfield, and Rugeley and Alrewas Road Act 1834

(

4 & 5 Will. 4

. c. xxviii))

Balderston and Walton-in-le-Dale Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. liv

18 May 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Road from Balderston to Burscough Bridge in Walton in le Dale, in the County Palatine of Lancaster.

New Sleaford and Anwick Road and Tattershall Witham Bridge Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lv

18 May 1814

An Act for continuing the Term, and altering and enlarging the Powers, of an Act of His present Majesty,

for widening and maintaining the Road leading from the East Side of the Market Place in New Sleaford to and through the Town of Anwick, in the County of Lincoln; and other Roads therein mentioned, in the said County; and for building a Bridge over the Witham, at or near to Tattershall Ferry.

(Repealed by

Sleaford and Tattershall Road Act 1856

(

19 & 20 Vict.

c. xxviii))

Standedge and Oldham Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lvi

18 May 1814

An Act for continuing and enlarging the Term and Powers of an Act

for making a Road from Stand Edge within Saddleworth in the County of York, to or near Mump's Brook, in the Township of Oldham, in the Parish of Prestwich, in the County of Lancaster, and other Roads therein mentioned.

(Repealed by

Standedge and Oldham Road Act 1827

(

7 & 8 Geo. 4

. c. lxiv))

Maidstone and Sutton Valence Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lvii

18 May 1814

An Act for repairing the Road from the Maidstone Turnpike Gate on the Loose Road, near Sutton Lane, in the Parish of Maidstone, to the King's Head Inn, in Sutton Valence, in the County of Kent; and for making and repairing other Roads therein mentioned in the said County.

(Repealed by

Maidstone and Newcastle (Kent) Road Act 1840

(

3 & 4 Vict.

c. lxxxiv))

Road from Crickhowell to Ross Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lviii

18 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of Two Acts of His present Majesty,

for repairing, widening and altering the Road from Crickhowell, in the County of Brecon, to the Croft Hands beyond New Inn, in the Turnpike Road between the City of Hereford and Ross, and other Roads therein described.

(Repealed by

Ross and Abergavenny Road Act 1833

(

3 & 4 Will. 4

. c. lxi))

Hampton and Staines Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lix

18 May 1814

An Act for continuing and amending Two Acts of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from the Guide Post at the West End of the Town of Hampton, over Sunbury Common, to the Town of Staines, in the County of Middlesex.

Road from Burnley to Edenfield Chapel Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lx

18 May 1814

An Act for amending, improving and keeping in Repair the Road from the Town of Burnley, in the County Palatine of Lancaster, to the Turnpike Road leading from Bury to Haslingden, at or near Edenfield Chapel, in the Township of Tottington Higher End, in the same County.

Roads in Staffordshire Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lxi

18 May 1814

An Act to continue the Term, and alter and enlarge the Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from Stone to Lane End, and to the Road between Leek and Sandon, on Meir Heath, and from thence to Blithe Bridge; and also from Meir to Trentham, and from thence to Stableford Bridge; and the Road from Walton to Eccleshall, in the County of Stafford.

(Repealed by

Trentham and Stone Roads Act 1843

(

6 & 7 Vict.

c. xxvi))

Lees (Yorkshire) and Hebden Bridge Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxii

18 May 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Road from a Place called Lees, in the Parish of Bingley, to commence and branch off from the Road leading from Cross Roads Inn to Haworth, at the North East Corner of a certain Close of Land called The Highfield, to Hebden Bridge, in the Parish of Halifax, all in the West Riding of the County of York.

York Minster Yard Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxiii

18 May 1814

An Act for enlarging and improving The Minster Yard of the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church of Saint Peter, in York, and other Places adjacent thereto.

Hyett's Estate Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxiv

18 May 1814

An Act for vesting certain Estates devised by the Will of Benjamin Hyett Esquire, deceased, in Trustees, to be sold, and for laying out the Monies thence arising in the Purchase of other Estates, to be settled to the same Uses as the Estates so sold.

Middleton (Norfolk) Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxv

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Middleton, in the County of Norfolk.

Great and Little Clifton Inclosures Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxvi

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Townships and Manor of Great and Little Clifton, in the County of Cumberland.

Hunton and Arrathore Tithes Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxvii

18 May 1814

An Act for better collecting the Tithes in the Townships of Hunton and Arrathorne, in the Parishes of Patrick Brompton and Hornby, in the North Riding of the County of York.

Beethom Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxviii

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Manor or Division of Beethom, in the Parish of Beethom, in the County of Westmorland.

Chiswick Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxix

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing certain Lands in the Parish of Chiswick, in the County of Middlesex, over which Right of Common hath been extinguished.

Edington Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxx

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Hamlet or Chapelry of Edington, in the Parish of Moorlinch, in the County of Somerset.

Renwick Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxi

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Manor and Parish of Renwick, in the County of Cumberland.

Mettingham and Bungay Trinity Inclosures Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxii

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Parishes of Metsingham and Bungay Trinity, in the County of Suffolk.

Bayton Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxiii

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Bayton, in the County of Worcester.

Sutton Mandeville Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxiv

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Tithing of Littlecot, in the Parish of Enford, in the County of Wilts.

Littlecot Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxv

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Tithing of Littlecot, in the Parish of Enford, in the County of Wilts.

Aston Clinton Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxvi

18 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Aston Clinton, in the County of Buckingham.

Sculcoates Additional Church Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxvii

27 May 1814

An Act for building a Church or Chapel of Ease in the Parish of Sculcoates, in the East Riding of the County of York.

Parish of St. George, Dublin Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxviii

27 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Provisions of an Act passed in the Forty sixth Year of His present Majesty,

intituled "An Act for altering and enlarging the Provisions of an Act passed in the Parliament of Ireland in the Thirty third Year of His present Majesty,

for making and constituting a new Parish by the Name of "The Parish of Saint George," on the Ground adjoining the City of Dublin, therein described; and for making and building a Parish Church therein."

Atlas Assurance Company Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxix

27 May 1814

An Act to enable The Atlas Assurance Company to sue and be sued in the Name of their Chairman, or Secretary, under certain Regulations.

Roads from Stroud Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxx

27 May 1814

An Act for making and maintaining certain Roads from the Town of Stroud, and several other Places therein mentioned, all in the County of Gloucester.

(Repealed by

Stroud and Chalford Turnpike Roads Act 1855

(

18 & 19 Vict.

c. cix))

French Top and Glossop Road Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxi

27 May 1814

An Act for continuing the Term and enlarging the Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for making a Road from French Top, in the West Riding of the County of York, to Glossop, in the County of Derby; and for repairing the Rood leading from Copley Meadow to Stayley Bridge, in the County Palatine of Chester.

(Repealed by

French Top and Stayley Road (Yorkshire, Cheshire) Act 1838

(

1 & 2 Vict.

c. xl))

Roads from Stafford to Uttoxeter and to Newport (Salop.) Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxii

27 May 1814

An Act for continuing the Term and altering and enlarging the Powers of an Act of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from Stafford to Uttoxeter, in the County of Stafford; and also the Road from Stafford to Newport, in the County of Salop.

(Repealed by

Stafford, Church Bridge and Uttoxeter Road, and Road from Stafford to Newport (Salop.) Act 1834

(

4 & 5 Will. 4

. c. lix))

Lincoln City Roads Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxiii

27 May 1814

An Act for continuing and amending an Act of His late Majesty,

and Two Acts of His present Majesty,

for repairing certain Roads leading to and from the City of Lincoln, and other Roads therein mentioned.

(Repealed by

Lincoln Roads Act 1841

(

4 & 5 Vict.

c. cviii))

Alcester to Birmingham and Stratford-upon-Avon Road at Woolton Wawen Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxiv

27 May 1814

An Act for repairing the Road from Aulcester to Wootton Wawen, in the County of Warwick.

Hungerford and Leckford Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxv

27 May 1814

An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of Two Acts of His present Majesty,

for repairing the Road from the End of the Turnpike Road from Besselsleigh, to Hungerford in the County of Berks, to Leckford otherwise Sousley Water, in the County of Wilts.

Ashton Gifford Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxvi

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Tithing of Ashton Gifford, in the Parish of Codford Saint Peter, in the County of Wilts.

Wallasey and West Kirby Inclosures Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxvii

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parishes of Wallasey and West Kirby, in the County of Chester.

Ballymore Eustace Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxviii

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the Parish of Ballymore Eustace, in the County of Dublin.

Crewkerne Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. lxxxix

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish and Rectory Manor of Crewkerne, in the County of Somerset.

Clayton with Frickley Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xc

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Frickley cum Clayton, otherwise Clayton with Frickley, in the West Riding of the County of York.

Barkisland Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xci

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Manor of Barkisland, in the Parish of Halifax, in the County of York.

Whixall Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xcii

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in Whixall, in the Parish of Prees, in the County of Salop.

Kilmington, Charlton Musgrave, Wincanton and Penselwood Inclosures Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xciii

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands within the several Parishes of Kilmington, Charlton Musgrave, Wincanton and Penselwood, the County of Somerset.

Ovenden Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xciv

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Manor of Ovenden, in the Parish of Halifax, in the County of York.

Streatley Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xcv

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Parish of Streatley, in the County of Berks.

Woodland Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xcvi

27 May 1814

An Act for inclosing Lands in the Manor and Township of Woodland, in the Parish of Cockfield, in the County of Durham.

Dover Castle Gaol, Poor Debtors Relief Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xcvii

17 June 1814

An Act for the Relief of Poor Debtors, and others, confined within the Gaol of Dover Castle.

Newport Pagnell Canal Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. xcviii

17 June 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Navigable Canal from Newport Pagnell to The Grand Junction Canal, at Great Linford, in the County of Buckingham.

(Repealed by

Newport Pagnell Railway Act 1863

(

26 & 27 Vict.

c. cx))

Delamere Forest Inclosure Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. xcix

17 June 1814

An Act for altering and amending an Act of the Fifty-second Year of His present Majesty's Reign,

for inclosing the Forest of Delamere, in the County of Chester.

Aberdeen Courthouse, City and County Offices and Gaol Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. c

17 June 1814

An Act for erecting and maintaining a new Court House and other Offices for the City and County of Aberdeen, and for providing and maintaining an additional Gaol for the said City and County, and for other Purposes relating thereto.

(Repealed by

Aberdeen County and Municipal Buildings Act 1866

(

29 & 30 Vict.

c. civ))

Usk Tram Road Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. ci

17 June 1814

An Act for making and maintaining a Tram Road or Railway from the Parish of Mamhilad, in the County of Monmouth, to or near Usk Bridge, in the said County.

Inveraray Gaol and Courthouse Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. cii

17 June 1814

An Act for erecting a new Gaol and Court House in the Burgh of Inveraray, in the Shire of Argyll.

Buckinghamshire County Rate Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. ciii

17 June 1814

An Act for making a fair and equal County Rate for the County of Buckingham.

(Repealed by

Statute Law (Repeals) Act 2008

(c. 12))

Kent Justices Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. civ

17 June 1814

An Act for enabling the Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent to hold a General Sessions annually, or oftener, for levying and applying the Rates and Expenditure of the said County; and to alter and amend an Act made in the Forty ninth Year of His present Majesty,

for regulating the Rates of the said County.

(Repealed by

County of Kent Act 1981

(c. xviii))

Bath Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. cv

17 June 1814

An Act for better paving, cleansing, lighting, watching, regulating and improving, the City of Bath, and the Liberties and Precincts thereof.

(Repealed by

City of Bath Act 1851

(

14 & 15 Vict.

c. civ))

Wolverhampton Improvement and Markets Act 1814

or the

Wolverhampton Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. cvi

17 June 1814

An Act for improving the Town of Wolverhampton, in the County of Stafford, and for removing and regulating the Markets in the said Town.

(Repealed by

Wolverhampton Improvement Act 1853

(

16 & 17 Vict.

c. xxviii))

Bristol Commercial Rooms Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. cvi

17 June 1814

An Act for enabling the Proprietors of The Commercial Roams in the City of Bristol, to sue and be sued in the Name of their Secretary, and for the Regulation of the said Rooms, and the Property thereof.

Dartford Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. cvii

17 June 1814

An Act for lighting, watching and improving the Town of Dartford, in the County of Kent.

(Repealed by

County of Kent Act 1981

(c. xviii))

Gateshead Improvement Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. cviii

17 June 1814

An Act for cleansing, lighting and otherwise improving certain Streets and Places within and near the Town and Borough of Gateshead, in the County of Durham.

(Repealed by

Tyne and Wear Act 1980

(c. xliii))

St. Sidwell's Church, Exeter Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. cx

17 June 1814

An Act for enlarging the Powers of an Act of His present Majesty, for repairing the Church of Saint Sidwell, in the City of Exeter.

Liverpool Additional Church Act 1814

(repealed)

54 Geo. 3. c. cxi

17 June 1814

An Act for building a New Church

within the Town and Parish of Liverpool, in the County Palatine of Lancaster.

(Repealed by

Liverpool Parish Church and Cemeteries Act 1823

(

4 Geo. 4

. c. lxxxix))

Lambeth Parish Churchyard and Approaches Act 1814

54 Geo. 3. c. cxii

17 June 1814

An Act for Enlarging the Church Yard and Burial Ground for the Parish of Lambeth, in the County of Surry; and for improving and widening the Approaches to the Church in the same Parish; and for other Purposes therein mentioned, relating thereto.

St. Mary, Newington, Poor Relief and Workhouse Act 1814
