---
title: "Electric motor (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_motor
domain: dc-motors
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: brushed dc motor, electric commutator, motor armature, back electromotive force
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## Advanced types

### Rotary

#### Ironless or coreless rotor motor

The coreless or ironless DC motor is a specialized permanent magnet DC motor. Optimized for rapid acceleration, the rotor is constructed without an iron core. The rotor can take the form of a winding-filled cylinder, or a self-supporting structure comprising only wire and bonding material. The rotor can fit inside the stator magnets; a magnetically soft stationary cylinder inside the rotor provides a return path for the stator magnetic flux. A second arrangement has the rotor winding basket surrounding the stator magnets. In that design, the rotor fits inside a magnetically soft cylinder that can serve as the motor housing, and provides a return path for the flux.

Because the rotor is much lower in mass compared to a conventional rotor, it can accelerate much more rapidly, often achieving a mechanical time constant under one millisecond. This is especially true if the windings use aluminum rather than (heavier) copper. The rotor has no metal mass to act as a heat sink; even small motors must be cooled. Overheating can be an issue for these designs.

The vibrating alert of cellular phones can be generated by cylindrical permanent-magnet motors, or disc-shaped types that have a thin multipolar disc field magnet, and an intentionally unbalanced molded-plastic rotor structure with two bonded coreless coils. Metal brushes and a flat commutator switch power to the rotor coils.

Related limited-travel actuators have no core and a bonded coil placed between the poles of high-flux thin permanent magnets. These are the fast head positioners for rigid-disk ("hard disk") drives. Although the contemporary design differs considerably from that of loudspeakers, it is still loosely (and incorrectly) referred to as a "voice coil" structure, because some earlier rigid-disk-drive heads moved in straight lines, and had a drive structure much like that of a loudspeaker.

#### Pancake or axial rotor motor

The printed armature or pancake motor has windings shaped as a disc running between arrays of high-flux magnets. The magnets are arranged in a circle facing the rotor spaced to form an axial air gap. This design is commonly known as the pancake motor because of its flat profile.

The armature (originally formed on a printed circuit board) is made from punched copper sheets that are laminated together using advanced composites to form a thin, rigid disc. The armature does not have a separate ring commutator. The brushes move directly on the armature surface making the whole design compact.

An alternative design is to use wound copper wire laid flat with a central conventional commutator, in a flower and petal shape. The windings are typically stabilized with electrical epoxy potting systems. These are filled epoxies that have moderate, mixed viscosity and a long gel time. They are highlighted by low shrinkage and low exotherm, and are typically UL 1446 recognized as a potting compound insulated with 180 °C (356 °F), Class H rating.

The unique advantage of ironless DC motors is the absence of cogging (torque variations caused by changing attraction between the iron and the magnets). Parasitic eddy currents cannot form in the rotor as it is totally ironless, although iron rotors are laminated. This can greatly improve efficiency, but variable-speed controllers must use a higher switching rate (>40 kHz) or DC because of decreased electromagnetic induction.

These motors were invented to drive the capstan(s) of magnetic tape drives, where minimal time to reach operating speed and minimal stopping distance were critical. Pancake motors are widely used in high-performance servo-controlled systems, robotic systems, industrial automation and medical devices. Due to the variety of constructions now available, the technology is used in applications from high temperature military to low cost pump and basic servos.

Another approach (Magnax) is to use a single stator sandwiched between two rotors. One such design has produced peak power of 15 kW/kg, sustained power around 7.5 kW/kg. This yokeless axial flux motor offers a shorter flux path, keeping the magnets further from the axis. The design allows zero winding overhang; 100 percent of the windings are active. This is enhanced with the use of rectangular-crosssection copper wire. The motors can be stacked to work in parallel. Instabilities are minimized by ensuring that the two rotor discs put equal and opposing forces onto the stator disc. The rotors are connected directly to one another via a shaft ring, cancelling out the magnetic forces.

#### Transverse Flux Motors (Modulated Pole Motors)

A transverse flux motor (TFM) is a type of motor characterized by a magnetic flux path that is transverse to the axis of rotation. The flux path is not completely axial or radial, but instead travels through U-shaped magnetic cores that comprise the stator. Transverse flux motors have a single winding for each phase that is wrapped circumferentially around the stator. This winding configuration allows for the number of machine poles to be decoupled from the size of the windings, leading to a high torque density and number of poles. Transverse flux motors suffer from cogging and ripple torque, and are complicated and expensive to design and produce. These factors have contributed to their niche role in the landscape of electric motors.

#### Servomotor

A servomotor is a motor that is used within a position-control or speed-control feedback system. Servomotors are used in applications such as machine tools, pen plotters, and other process systems. Motors intended for use in a servomechanism must have predictable characteristics for speed, torque, and power. The speed/torque curve is important and is high ratio for a servomotor. Dynamic response characteristics such as winding inductance and rotor inertia are important; these factors limit performance. Large, powerful, but slow-responding servo loops may use conventional AC or DC motors and drive systems with position or speed feedback. As dynamic response requirements increase, more specialized motor designs such as coreless motors are used. AC motors' superior power density and acceleration characteristics tends to favor permanent magnet synchronous, BLDC, induction, and SRM drive approaches.

A servo system differs from some stepper motor applications in that position feedback is continuous while the motor is running. A stepper system inherently operates open-loop—relying on the motor not to "miss steps" for short term accuracy—with any feedback such as a "home" switch or position encoder external to the motor system.

#### Stepper motor

Stepper motors are typically used to provide precise rotations. An internal rotor containing permanent magnets or a magnetically soft rotor with salient poles is controlled by a set of electronically switched external magnets. A stepper motor may also be thought of as a cross between a DC electric motor and a rotary solenoid. As each coil is energized in turn, the rotor aligns itself with the magnetic field produced by the energized field winding. Unlike a synchronous motor, the stepper motor may not rotate continuously; instead, it moves in steps—starting and then stopping—advancing from one position to the next as field windings are energized and de-energized in sequence. Depending on the sequence, the rotor may turn forwards or backwards, and it may change direction, stop, speed up or slow down at any time.

Simple stepper motor drivers entirely energize or entirely de-energize the field windings, leading the rotor to "cog" to a limited number of positions. Microstepping drivers can proportionally control the power to the field windings, allowing the rotors to position between cog points and rotate smoothly. Computer-controlled stepper motors are one of the most versatile positioning systems, particularly as part of a digital servo-controlled system.

Stepper motors can be rotated to a specific angle in discrete steps with ease, and hence stepper motors are used for read/write head positioning in early disk drives, where the precision and speed they offered could correctly position the read/write head. As drive density increased, precision and speed limitations made them obsolete for hard drives—the precision limitation made them unusable, and the speed limitation made them uncompetitive—thus newer hard disk drives use voice coil-based head actuator systems. (The term "voice coil" in this connection is historic; it refers to the structure in a cone-type loudspeaker.)

Stepper motors are often used in computer printers, optical scanners, and digital photocopiers to move the active element, the print head carriage (inkjet printers), and the platen or feed rollers.

So-called quartz analog wristwatches contain the smallest commonplace stepping motors; they have one coil, draw little power, and have a permanent magnet rotor. The same kind of motor drives battery-powered quartz clocks. Some of these watches, such as chronographs, contain more than one stepper motor.

Closely related in design to three-phase AC synchronous motors, stepper motors and SRMs are classified as variable reluctance motor type.

### Linear

A linear motor is essentially any electric motor that has been "unrolled" so that, instead of producing torque (rotation), it produces a straight-line force along its length.

Linear motors are most commonly induction motors or stepper motors. Linear motors are commonly found in roller-coasters where the rapid motion of the motorless railcar is controlled by the rail. They are also used in maglev trains, where the train "flies" over the ground. On a smaller scale, the 1978 era HP 7225A pen plotter used two linear stepper motors to move the pen along the X and Y axes.

### Non-magnetic

#### Electrostatic

An electrostatic motor is based on the attraction and repulsion of electric charge. Usually, electrostatic motors are the dual of conventional coil-based motors. They typically require a high-voltage power supply, although small motors employ lower voltages. Conventional electric motors instead employ magnetic attraction and repulsion, and require high current at low voltages. In the 1750s, the first electrostatic motors were developed by Benjamin Franklin and Andrew Gordon. Electrostatic motors find frequent use in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) where their drive voltages are below 100 volts, and where moving, charged plates are far easier to fabricate than coils and iron cores. The molecular machinery that runs living cells is often based on linear and rotary electrostatic motors.

#### Piezoelectric

A piezoelectric motor or piezo motor is a type of electric motor based upon the change in shape of a piezoelectric material when an electric field is applied. Piezoelectric motors make use of the converse piezoelectric effect whereby the material produces acoustic or ultrasonic vibrations to produce linear or rotary motion. In one mechanism, the elongation in a single plane is used to make a series of stretches and position holds, similar to the way a caterpillar moves.

#### Electric propulsion

An electrically powered spacecraft propulsion system uses electric motor technology to propel spacecraft in outer space. Most systems are based on electrically accelerating propellant to high speed, while some systems are based on electrodynamic tethers principles of propulsion to the magnetosphere.


## Comparison by major categories

| Type | Advantages | Disadvantages | Typical application | Typical drive, output |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Self-commutated motors |   |   |   |   |
| Brushed DC | Simple speed controlLow initial cost | Maintenance (brushes)Medium lifespanCostly commutator and brushes | Steel millsPaper making machinesTreadmill exercisersAutomotive accessories | Rectifier, linear transistor(s) or DC chopper controller. |
| Brushless DC motor (BLDC or BLDM) | Long lifespanLow maintenanceHigh efficiency | Higher initial costRequires EC controller with closed-loop control | Rigid ("hard") disk drivesCD/DVD playersElectric vehiclesRC VehiclesUAVs | Synchronous; single-phase or three-phase with PM rotor and trapezoidal stator winding; VFD typically VS PWM inverter type. |
| Switched reluctance motor (SRM) | Long lifespanLow maintenanceHigh efficiencyNo permanent magnetsLow costSimple construction | Mechanical resonance possibleHigh iron lossesOpen or vector control and parallel operation impossibleRequires EC controller | AppliancesElectric VehiclesTextile millsAircraft applications | PWM and various other drive types, which tend to be used in specialized / OEM applications. |
| Universal motor | High starting torqueCompactHigh speed | Maintenance (brushes)Shorter lifespanUsually acoustically noisyOnly small ratings are economical | Handheld power toolsBlendersVacuum cleanersInsulation blowers | Variable single-phase AC, half-wave or full-wave phase-angle control with triac(s); closed-loop control optional. |
| AC asynchronous motors |   |   |   |   |
| AC polyphase squirrel-cage or wound-rotor induction motor (SCIM or WRIM, resp.) | Self-startingLow costRobustReliableRatings to 1+ MWStandardized types | High starting currentLower efficiency due to need for magnetization | Fixed-speed (traditionally) SCIM the world's workhorse especially in low-performance applications of all types Variable-speed (traditionally) low-performance variable-torque pumps, fans, blowers and compressors. Variable-speed (increasingly) other high-performance constant-torque and constant-power or dynamic loads. | Fixed-speed low-performance applications of all types. Variable-speed (traditionally) WRIM drives or fixed-speed V/Hz-controlled VSDs. Variable-speed (increasingly) vector-controlled VSDs displacing DC, WRIM and single-phase AC induction motor drives. |
| AC SCIM split-phase capacitor-start | High powerhigh starting torque | Speed slightly below synchronousStarting switch or relay required | AppliancesStationary Power Tools | Fixed or variable single-phase AC, variable speed being derived, typically, by full-wave phase-angle control with triac(s); closed-loop control optional. |
| AC SCIM split-phase capacitor-run | Moderate powerHigh starting torqueNo starting switchComparatively long life | Speed slightly below synchronousSlightly more costly | Industrial blowersIndustrial machinery |   |
| AC SCIM split-phase, auxiliary start winding | Moderate powerLow starting torque | Speed slightly below synchronousStarting switch or relay required | AppliancesStationary power tools |   |
| AC induction shaded-pole motor | Low costLong life | Speed slightly below synchronousLow starting torqueSmall ratingslow efficiency | Fansappliancesrecord players |   |
| AC synchronous motors |   |   |   |   |
| Wound-rotor synchronous motor (WRSM) | Synchronous speedInherently more efficient | More costlyLow power factor | Industrial motors | Fixed or variable speed, three-phase; VFD typically six-step CS load-commutated inverter type or VS PWM inverter type. |
| Hysteresis motor | Accurate speed controlLow noiseNo vibrationHigh starting torque | Very low efficiency | ClocksTimersSound producing or recording equipmentHard driveCapstan drive | Single-phase AC, two-phase capacitor-start, capacitor run motor |
| Synchronous reluctance motor (SyRM) | Equivalent to SCIM except more robust, more efficient, runs cooler, smaller footprintCompetes with PM synchronous motor without demagnetization issues | Requires a controllerNot widely availableHigh cost | AppliancesElectric vehiclesTextile millsAircraft applications | VFD can be standard DTC type or VS inverter PWM type. |
| Specialty motors |   |   |   |   |
| Pancake or axial rotor motors | Compact designSimple speed control | Medium costMedium lifespan | Office EquipmentFans/PumpsFast industrial and military servos | Drives can typically be brushed or brushless DC type. |
| Stepper motor | Precision positioningHigh holding torque | Some can be costlyRequire a controller | Positioning in printers and floppy disc drives; industrial machine tools | Not a VFD. Stepper position is determined by pulse counting. |


## Operating principles

### Force and torque

An electric motor converts electrical energy to mechanical energy through the force between two opposed magnetic fields. At least one of the two magnetic fields must be created by an electromagnet through the magnetic field caused by an electrical current.

The force between a current I in a conductor of length $\ell$ perpendicular to a magnetic field $\mathbf {B}$ may be calculated using the Lorentz force law:

$\mathbf {F} =I\ell \times \mathbf {B}$

Note: X denotes vector cross product.

The most general approaches to calculating the forces in motors use tensor notation.

### Power

Electric motor output power is given as $P_{\text{em}}=T\omega =Fv$ where:

- $\omega$ : shaft angular speed, [radians per second]
- T : torque, [Newton-meters]
- F : force, [Newtons]
- v : velocity, [meters per second].

In Imperial units a motor's mechanical power output is given by,

$P_{\text{em}}={\frac {\omega _{\text{rpm}}T}{5252}}$

(horsepower)

where:

- $\omega _{\text{rpm}}$ , shaft angular speed [rpm]
- T : torque, [foot-pounds].

In an asynchronous or induction motor, the relationship between motor speed and air gap power is given by the following:

$P_{\text{airgap}}={\frac {R_{r}}{s}}I_{r}^{2}$

, where

R

r

– rotor resistance

I

r

2

– square of current induced in the rotor

s – motor slip

; i.e., difference between synchronous speed and slip speed, which provides the relative movement needed for current induction in the rotor.

### Back EMF

The movement of armature windings of a direct-current or universal motor through a magnetic field, induce a voltage in them. This voltage tends to oppose the motor supply voltage and so is called "back electromotive force (EMF)". The voltage is proportional to the running speed of the motor. The back EMF of the motor, plus the voltage drop across the winding internal resistance and brushes, must equal the voltage at the brushes. This provides the fundamental mechanism of speed regulation in a DC motor. If the mechanical load increases, the motor slows down; a lower back EMF results, and more current is drawn from the supply. This increased current provides the additional torque to balance the load.

In AC machines, it is sometimes useful to consider a back EMF source within the machine; this is of particular concern for close speed regulation of induction motors on VFDs.

### Losses

Motor losses are mainly due to resistive losses in windings, core losses and mechanical losses in bearings, and aerodynamic losses, particularly where cooling fans are present, also occur.

Losses also occur in commutation, mechanical commutators spark; electronic commutators and also dissipate heat.

### Efficiency

To calculate a motor's efficiency, the mechanical output power is divided by the electrical input power:

$\eta ={\frac {P_{\text{m}}}{P_{\text{e}}}}$

,

where $\eta$ is energy conversion efficiency, $P_{\text{e}}$ is electrical input power, and $P_{\text{m}}$ is mechanical output power:

$P_{\text{e}}=IV$

$P_{\text{m}}=T\omega$

where V is input voltage, I is input current, T is output torque, and $\omega$ is output angular velocity. It is possible to derive analytically the point of maximum efficiency. It is typically at less than 1/2 the stall torque.

Various national regulatory authorities have enacted legislation to encourage the manufacture and use of higher-efficiency motors. Electric motors have efficiencies ranging from around 15%-20% for shaded pole motors, up to 98% for permanent magnet motors, with efficiency also dependent on load. Peak efficiency is usually at 75% of the rated load. So (as an example) a 10 HP motor is most efficient when driving a load that requires 7.5 HP. Efficiency also depends on motor size; larger motors tend to be more efficient. Some motors can not operate continually for more than a specified period of time (e.g. for more than an hour per run)

### Goodness factor

Eric Laithwaite proposed a metric to determine the 'goodness' of an electric motor:

$G={\frac {\omega }{{\text{resistance}}\times {\text{reluctance}}}}={\frac {\omega \mu \sigma A_{\text{m}}A_{\text{e}}}{l_{\text{m}}l_{\text{e}}}}$

Where:

G

is the goodness factor (factors above 1 are likely to be efficient)

$A_{\text{m}},A_{\text{e}}$

are the cross sectional areas of the magnetic and electric circuit

$l_{\text{m}},l_{\text{e}}$

are the lengths of the magnetic and electric circuits

$\mu$

is the permeability of the core

$\omega$

is the angular frequency the motor is driven at

From this, he showed that the most efficient motors are likely to have relatively large magnetic poles. However, the equation only directly relates to non PM motors.


## Performance parameters

### Torque

Electromagnetic motors derive torque from the vector product of the interacting fields. Calculating torque requires knowledge of the fields in the air gap. Once these have been established, the torque is the integral of all the force vectors multiplied by the vector's radius. The current flowing in the winding produces the fields. For a motor using a magnetic material the field is not proportional to the current.

A figure relating the current to the torque can inform motor selection. The maximum torque for a motor depends on the maximum current, absent thermal considerations.

When optimally designed within a given core saturation constraint and for a given active current (i.e., torque current), voltage, pole-pair number, excitation frequency (i.e., synchronous speed), and air-gap flux density, all categories of electric motors/generators exhibit virtually the same maximum continuous shaft torque (i.e., operating torque) within a given air-gap area with winding slots and back-iron depth, which determines the physical size of electromagnetic core. Some applications require bursts of torque beyond the maximum, such as bursts to accelerate an electric vehicle from standstill. Always limited by magnetic core saturation or safe operating temperature rise and voltage, the capacity for torque bursts beyond the maximum differs significantly across motor/generator types.

Electric machines without a transformer circuit topology, such as that of WRSMs or PMSMs, cannot provide torque bursts without saturating the magnetic core. At that point, additional current cannot increase torque. Furthermore, the permanent magnet assembly of PMSMs can be irreparably damaged.

Electric machines with a transformer circuit topology, such as induction machines, induction doubly fed electric machines, and induction or synchronous wound-rotor doubly fed (WRDF) machines, permit torque bursts because the EMF-induced active current on either side of the transformer oppose each other and thus contribute nothing to the transformer coupled magnetic core flux density, avoiding core saturation.

Electric machines that rely on induction or asynchronous principles short-circuit one port of the transformer circuit and as a result, the reactive impedance of the transformer circuit becomes dominant as slip increases, which limits the magnitude of active (i.e., real) current. Torque bursts two to three times higher than the maximum design torque are realizable.

The brushless wound-rotor synchronous doubly fed (BWRSDF) machine is the only electric machine with a truly dual ported transformer circuit topology (i.e., both ports independently excited with no short-circuited port). The dual ported transformer circuit topology is known to be unstable and requires a multiphase slip-ring-brush assembly to propagate limited power to the rotor winding set. If a precision means were available to instantaneously control torque angle and slip for synchronous operation during operation while simultaneously providing brushless power to the rotor winding set, the active current of the BWRSDF machine would be independent of the reactive impedance of the transformer circuit and bursts of torque significantly higher than the maximum operating torque and far beyond the practical capability of any other type of electric machine would be realizable. Torque bursts greater than eight times operating torque have been calculated.

### Continuous torque density

The continuous torque density of conventional electric machines is determined by the size of the air-gap area and the back-iron depth, which are determined by the power rating of the armature winding set, the speed of the machine, and the achievable air-gap flux density before core saturation. Despite the high coercivity of neodymium or samarium-cobalt permanent magnets, continuous torque density is virtually the same amongst electric machines with optimally designed armature winding sets. Continuous torque density relates to method of cooling and permissible operation period before destruction by overheating of windings or permanent magnet damage.

Other sources state that various e-machine topologies have differing torque density. One source shows the following:

| Electric machine type | Specific torque density (Nm/kg) |
|---|---|
| SPM – brushless ac, 180° current conduction | 1.0 |
| SPM – brushless ac, 120° current conduction | 0.9–1.15 |
| IM, asynchronous machine | 0.7–1.0 |
| IPM, interior permanent magnet machine | 0.6–0.8 |
| VRM, doubly salient reluctance machine | 0.7–1.0 |

where—specific torque density is normalized to 1.0 for the surface permanent magnet (SPM)—brushless ac, 180° current conduction.

Torque density is approximately four times greater for liquid cooled motors, compared to those which are air cooled.

A source comparing direct current, induction motors (IM), PMSM and SRM showed:

| Characteristic | dc | IM | PMSM | SRM |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Torque density | 3 | 3.5 | 5 | 4 |
| Power density | 3 | 4 | 5 | 3.5 |

Another source notes that PMSM up to 1 MW have considerably higher torque density than induction machines.

### Continuous power density

The continuous power density is determined by the product of the continuous torque density and the constant torque speed range. Electric motors can achieve densities of up to 20 kW/kg, meaning 20 kilowatts of output power per kilogram.


## Acoustic noise and vibrations

Acoustic noise and vibrations are usually classified in three sources:

- mechanical sources (e.g. due to bearings)
- aerodynamic sources (e.g. due to shaft-mounted fans)
- magnetic sources (e.g. due to magnetic forces such as Maxwell and magnetostriction forces acting on stator and rotor structures)

The latter source, which can be responsible for the "whining noise" of electric motors, is called electromagnetically induced acoustic noise.


## Standards

The following are major design, manufacturing, and testing standards covering electric motors:

- American Petroleum Institute: API 541 Form-Wound Squirrel Cage Induction Motors – 375 kW (500 Horsepower) and Larger
- American Petroleum Institute: API 546 Brushless Synchronous Machines – 500 kVA and Larger
- American Petroleum Institute: API 547 General-purpose Form-Wound Squirrel Cage Induction Motors – 250 Hp and Larger
- Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: IEEE Std 112 Standard Test Procedure for Polyphase Induction Motors and Generators
- Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: IEEE Std 115 Guide for Test Procedures for Synchronous Machines
- Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: IEEE Std 841 Standard for Petroleum and Chemical Industry – Premium Efficiency Severe Duty Totally Enclosed Fan-Cooled (TEFC) Squirrel Cage Induction Motors – Up to and Including 370 kW (500 Hp)
- International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC 60034 Rotating Electrical Machines
- International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC 60072 Dimensions and output series for rotating electrical machines
- National Electrical Manufacturers Association: MG-1 Motors and Generators
- Underwriters Laboratories: UL 1004 – Standard for Electric Motors
