---
title: "AMC Hornet (part 2/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AMC_Hornet
domain: dodge-aspen
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: dodge aspen
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 2/3
---

## International markets

The AMC Hornet was exported to international markets, as well as assembled under license from Complete knock down (CKD) kits that were shipped from AMC's U.S. or Canadian plants. The foreign-built cars incorporated numerous components and parts that were produced by local manufacturers to gain tax or tariff preferences.

### Australia

Between 1970 and 1975, a total of 1,825 Hornets were built in right-hand-drive at the Australian Motor Industries (AMI) factory at Port Melbourne in Victoria, Australia. The initial engineering to right-hand drive and interior design was achieved firstly with South African-built Hornets and then used as the blueprint for Australian assembly. The Hornet was sold in Australia as the "Rambler Hornet", only in the four-door sedan body style. They were fitted with either a 232 cu in (3.8 L) or 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine and with an automatic transmission.

Australian Hornets were a model year behind the U.S. models. In other words, the 1972 Australian model was a U.S. 1971 model. However, AMI did not import the U.S. 1973 models and therefore no Hornets were assembled in Australia for 1974. Production resumed in 1975, with AMI making the U.S. 1972 model once again.

While the Hornet was the least expensive compact model in the United States, the Hornet in Australia was a luxury model, with high levels of trim, carpet, tires, and accessories. These included high-back seats, fully lined boot and covered spare wheel. The Hornet used a PBR fully assisted dual braking system, and front disc brakes from the Javelin Trans Am. The Hornet sold for $3,999 in 1970, with 407 cars being sold in Australia in that year. Sales peaked in 1971 with 597 sold. Sales dropped to 355 in 1972 and to 212 in 1973. 1974 saw 118 sales (of cars assembled in 1973.) 1975 was the Hornet's final year in Australia, with 136 sales.

### Costa Rica

Purdy Motor was established in 1959 to import Toyota and AMC vehicles into Costa Rica.|Because of new laws requiring that all automobiles sold there be assembled locally from CKD (completely knocked-down), Purdy built an assembly plant in San Jose in 1965 to assemble Toyota and AMC vehicles for the local market. Purdy Motor would go on to assemble the Rambler American, Classic, Ambassador, Rebel, and Javelin during this time. Assembly of the Hornet began in 1970 and was marketed as the "Rambler SST."

In 1974 a new local vehicle manufacturer, Motorizada de Costa Rica, purchased the rights of Rambler distributorship from Purdy Motors. Motorizada continued to assemble AMC and Jeep vehicles as well as other brands. The Hornet Sportabout debuted in Costa Rica under the unusual name of the AMC Unisex, which was known in Mexico as the American 75.

Motorizada was liquidated in 1979 allegedly for not paying taxes thereby ending the AMC brand in Costa Rica.

### Mexico

American Motors Corporation held a partial stake in Vehículos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) and produced Hornet models in Mexico from 1970 through 1977. Available body styles included the two- and four-door sedans, as well as the four-door liftback wagon. The cars assembled in Mexico continued to be called VAM Rambler following the tradition of the VAM-built Rambler American models until 1974.

| VAM models | AMC equivalent |
|---|---|
| Rambler American (until 1974) | Hornet base model |
| Rambler American Rally (2-door sedan only) | Hornet X hatchback |
| American (after 1975) | Hornet base model |
| American Rally (2-door sedan only) | Hornet X hatchback |
| American ECD (1975–1977) | Hornet DL two-door (1976 only) and four-door sedans |
| American GFS (1977) | Hornet DL two-door sedan |
| Camioneta American automática (1977) | Hornet DL wagon with automatic transmission |

The VAM cars came with different trims and interiors than the equivalent AMC-made models. The models also combined different front clips, such as the 1977 VAM American came with the shorter U.S. and Canadian market 1977 Gremlin front-end, while its interior trim featured premium seats and upholstery. The engines in VAM models were based on AMC designs, but modified and built by VAM. Unique to Mexico were the 252 cu in (4.1 L) and 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engines. These were designed to cope with the high altitudes and low octane gasoline in Mexico.

#### VAM Rambler American

The initial VAM Rambler Americans were available in a single, nameless trim level (equivalent to the U.S. SST models), with only an optional performance-minded "Rally" package for the two-door sedans, carried over from 1969. The model was not available with the 199 cu in (3.3 L) I6 or any V8 engines. The muscle-oriented SC/360 and Hornet AMX were not made, and no Levis or Gucci trims were available. Legislation at the time allowed the manufacture of three body styles, so the hatchback version was not produced in Mexico. All VAM sporty versions of the Hornet were based on AMC's 1971 and 1972 two-door sedan counterparts. Unlike the Hornet, the now fourth-generation VAM Rambler American kept the same economy focus of its predecessor models despite its long list of standard equipment.

##### 1970

The Hornet-based 1970 VAM Rambler American was available as a two- or four-door sedan. The standard 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 producing 145 hp (108 kW; 147 PS) featured a 244-degree camshaft, 8.5:1 compression ratio, and a single-barrel Carter RBS or YF carburetor. Standard was a fully synchronized three-speed manual transmission with a column-mounted shifter, a heavy-duty clutch, a 3.54:1 rear differential gear ratio, regular suspension, four-wheel drum brakes, manual steering, a four-bladed rigid-engine fan, and a regular cooling system.

Standard convenience equipment included a two-tone padded dashboard with a three-pod instrument cluster, electric windshield wipers and washers, a 200 km/h speedometer, side marker lights, four-way hazard lights, antitheft steering column locking mechanism, base steering wheel, brake system warning light, AM radio with a single in-dash speaker, front ashtray, cigarette lighter, locking glove box with "RAMBLER" emblem on the door, padded sunvisors, day/night rearview mirror, cardboard-type sound-absorbing and heat-isolating headliner, round dome light, dual coat hooks, flip-open rear side vents, full carpeting, driver's side rubber floor mat sewed to the carpet, front bench seat with split folding backs on two-door sedan or with a fixed back on the four-door, bench rear seat, two-point front seatbelts, dual rear ashtrays, front and rear side armrests, vinyl and cloth upholstery on seats and side door panels, aluminum grille, backup lights, steel wheels with center hubcaps, dual "232 SIX" rear quarter panel emblems, dual "bulleye" emblems on the lower corner of the rear side vents, script "American" emblems on both front fenders, capital-lettered "RAMBLER" rectangular emblem between the right taillight and the gas filler, non-locking gas cap, manual driver's side remote mirror, and a radio antenna.

Factory options included a heater with windshield defroster, power drum brakes, power steering, bright exterior molding package, protective side moldings, parcel shelf, courtesy lights (separate or under-shelf), full wheel covers, deluxe or sports-style steering wheel, passenger's side remote mirror, remote-controlled driver's side remote mirror, a bright panel between taillights, and metal bumper guards with rubber edges. Dealership accessories included a universal 6000 RPM VDO tachometer with dual hands, vinyl-covered roof with additional bright moldings, heavy-duty suspension (front sway bar and stiffer adjustable shock absorbers), a floor-mounted shifter for the three-speed transmission, front disk brakes, locking gas cap, license plate frames, mud flaps, trunk cover, luggage rack, universal air conditioning system, among others.

##### 1971

The VAM Rambler American sedans for 1971 were carried over from 1970. Enhancements included VAM's 266-degree camshaft for the 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 engine, replacing AMC's 244-degree camshaft. Despite the power increase, the engine's official output remained 145 hp (108 kW; 147 PS) at 4,400 rpm. New interior colors, side armrests, and door panel designs were available. The AM radio was updated to a newer design. The new model year also introduced the Hornet Sportabout-based Camioneta Rambler American. The station wagon version included the same equipment as the two sedans, plus several additional features. The Camioneta Rambler American included the parcel shelf with courtesy lights as standard equipment. It was the only Mexican Hornet version to offer a three-speed automatic transmission as optional equipment. Wagons with the automatic transmission included the one-barrel 145 hp (108 kW; 147 PS) 232 cu in (3.8 L) engine, while those with a manual transmission had the Carter WCD carburetor rated at 155 hp (116 kW; 157 PS).

##### 1972

The 1972 model year VAM models incorporated the engineering revisions and upgrades as the U.S.-market AMC-built counterparts. The one-barrel 145 hp (108 kW; 147 PS) 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 was standard on sedans and wagons with automatic transmission. Station wagons with a manual transmission featured the two-barrel 155 hp (116 kW; 157 PS) version. All VAM Americans featured a front sway bar as standard equipment.The 1972 models also included a new plastic grille with a revised hood latch, a new taillight design with larger backup lights, a new optional wheel cover design, a third AM radio model (shared with the VAM Javelin), and new interior door panels with a wood-imitation rectangular panel. This was also the first year of the seatbelt warning buzzer located above the light and wiper knobs. The Camioneta Rambler American featured the Chrysler-built TorqueFlite A904 automatic transmission, replacing the previous Borg-Warner "Shift-Command" units.

##### 1973

The 1973 model year VAM Hornets were redesigned. They incorporated the U.S.-version with a new front-end design with larger horizontal rectangular side marker lights, semi-square headlight bezels, and a V-shaped grille and hood edge. The front bumper included AMC's five-mile-per-hour design, but without the recovering shocks; in their place were regular rigid bumper mounts as in previous years. Mexico's car safety standards were less restrictive; thus, VAMs mounted the bumpers closer to the body than their AMC counterparts. The 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 rated at 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS) (gross) replaced the 232 engine. They featured Carter RBS/YF one-barrel carburetors, VAM's 266-degree camshafts, and an 8.5:1 compression ratio. The three-speed automatic transmission became available as an option on sedan models, and the rear differential gear ratio was changed to 3.31:1 across all units. Other features included new door panels, longer and narrower inside door latches, the cigarette lighter, wiper/washer, and lights now had soft rubber knobs, modified taillight lenses, the deletion of the rectangular "RAMBLER" emblem in favor of "American" script on the rear panel, "258" emblems replacing the "232 SIX" rectangular versions and the removal of the bullseye emblems on the C-pillar base.

##### 1974

The 1974 Rambler American was a carryover. Differences included a new rear five-mile-per-hour bumper, and the rear license plate was relocated to the center of the rear panel over the gas filler. The seat and door panel designs were revised. The parking brake pedal received a smaller rubber pad. The standard wheels were VAM's new 14x6-inch five-spoke design with volcano-type hubcaps. The 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 included an evaporative canister to reduce emissions and a slightly lower 8.3:1 compression ratio. Mid-year, the compression ratio was further reduced to 7.6:1. Nevertheless, the engines remained rated at 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS).

#### VAM American

The introduction of the Gremlin line by VAM in 1974 became the company's smallest and most affordable model. There was a gap between the lower-end Rambler American line and the larger, top Classic (Matador) line. The differences in size and engine series between the Rambler American and the Gremlin were not enough for VAM to create the impression of a more solid, more diverse product line, since both cars were perceived as belonging to the same economy class, which would produce internal competition. The VAM Rambler American was restricted to the economy segment since its introduction to the Mexican market, the only exceptions to this being the luxury limited edition Rambler American Hardtop (Rambler American 440H in the US) for 1963 and 1965, as well as the sporty Rambler American Rally (Rambler American Rogue and Hornet Rallye X/Hornet X in the US) from 1969 through 1974. The model was shifted from the economy segment to the mid-segment when an all-new generation was introduced in 1975. This repositioned the company's full product line and rejuvenated the compact line. The Hornet-based Rambler American had been on the market for five years, continued to sell well, and maintained a positive image. The name was simplified from Rambler American to just American, marking the discontinuation of the Rambler brand in Mexico. A new luxury American ECD trim level was followed by a revised and improved American Rally and American base models. These differentiated the line from the Gremlin. All versions obtained updates and upgrades.

##### 1975

The American base model in its first year featured all-new rectangular amber parking lights, a grille divided into six rectangular sections, and more hexagonal-lined headlight bezels. Manual front disk brakes were standard (though a few manual-transmission units still included front drums). The 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine was rated at 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS) and featured Prestolite electronic ignition. This engine was carried over with a 7.6:1 compression ratio, 266-degree camshaft, and a single-barrel Carter YF or RBS carburetor. Interiors included new door panels available in solid or two-tone colors, as well as new seat patterns. The two-tone dashboard was replaced by a color-keyed unit with a new "American" emblem on the glove box door and a standard fuel economy gauge. Cars equipped with an automatic transmission included a heater and power steering at no extra cost.

##### 1976

The 1976 models were almost the same as their immediate predecessors; their differences were limited to a compression ratio increase for the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 from 7.6:1 to 8.0:1. New gauges appeared in the form of a 160 km/h speedometer and revised warning lights, sun visors were redesigned to larger more rectangular units with side bending portions, a new more-ornate dome light lens, new seat, and door panel designs, while a rear defroster was added to the options. The separate seatbelt warning buzzer between the wiper and light knobs was discontinued. New full-rubber bumper guards became available alongside the already existing metal ones with rubber strips.

##### 1977

The 1977 models included a facelift that AMC originally intended to be exclusive to the Gremlin line. The design included a new front bumper, squared headlight bezels with rounded corners, and an egg-crate smile-shaped grille that incorporated the rectangular parking lights from the previous two years. An "American" emblem was mounted on the right front edge of the hood. The two-point seatbelts were upgraded to fixed three-point units on both sedan models. Station wagons included three-point retractable units as standard. The Carter RBS carburetor was discontinued, leaving the YF model on the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6.

Two-door sedans with manual transmissions now featured a floor-mounted gearshift and low-back, fold-down individual seats. In contrast, models with automatic transmissions retained a bench seat with split-folding backs and a column-mounted shifter. Manual transmission cars incorporated a safety lock lever in their steering column ignition switch, shared with the American Rally model. The seats and door panels were slightly modified from the previous year. A new "American" emblem with different typography was applied to the glove box door. The "258" rear-quarter-panel emblems were replaced with new "4.2" versions. Although VAM introduced a factory-installed air conditioning system for its 1977 model year cars, it was not available for the American series. The objective was to offer it in high-trim and performance models. However, VAM dealerships could install a universal air conditioning system for non-factory-built units.

#### Rambler American Rally

The sports-oriented Rambler American Rally package was originally introduced in 1969 for the third-generation Rambler American two-door sedan as a more economical, sporty alternative to the muscular VAM Javelin and the personal-luxury VAM Rambler Classic SST (Rebel SST hardtop). With the arrival of the new Hornet-based models for 1970, the package was continued and improved, featuring not only more standard production accessories but also all-new exclusive ones. The Rambler American Rally model was available a full year before AMC's Hornet SC/360 and two years before the Hornet X and Hornet Rallye-X models, making it the first-ever performance product based on the Hornet.

The package started with an exclusive engine designed by VAM, the high-performance 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 rated at 160 hp (119 kW; 162 PS) featuring a 9.8:1 a compression ratio, a Carter WCD carburetor, and a 266-degree camshaft. This package included a black two-spoke sports steering wheel with a central bullseye emblem, wide reclining individual front seats, and a floor-mounted Hurst Performance shifter for the 150-T three-speed manual transmission. A locking mechanism for the shifter connected to the steering wheel ignition switch. Other features included a bright molding package, a rear panel overlay between the taillights, and two courtesy lights. Unlike the 1969 version, power drum brakes were no longer standard; they were optional.

The Rambler American Rally for 1971 was almost equal to the previous year. The new script "Rally" emblems replaced the "American" fender emblems to differentiate the 1971 models from the 1970 models. The front seat controls were revised with a new knob placed on the outer side of each seatback, new "mushroom"-shaped armrests with a central horizontal bright molding, new side panels with simulated stitches, and a steering wheel design similar to the previous one but incorporating three false spokes per arm instead of the smooth soft surface. A new AM monaural radio model replaced the previous unit used since 1966 in Rambler American and Classic models.

The success of the Rally package led VAM to use it as a trim level for 1972, along with improvements. The safety mechanism connecting the shifter to the ignition switch was discontinued and replaced with a small safety lever on the side of the column to prevent the ignition switch from accidentally turning to the lock position while the vehicle is still in motion. The previously optional 8000 RPM tachometer became standard equipment along with AMC's new three-arm three-spoke sports steering wheel with a round center horn button. Low-back, smaller, more bucket-like front reclining seats replaced the wide units of the previous two years, creating a free space between the units over the transmission tunnel. The round floor-shift base shared with 1968–1969 Javelins was replaced by a new square design. The bright rear panel received an aluminum-look finish, and the taillight lenses featured a new, larger backup light and side stripes. The grille was changed from aluminum to plastic, and an updated hood latch appeared. The front sway bar became standard. The 1972 Rally engine was the VAM 252 cu in (4.1 L) I6 producing 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS) at 4,600 rpm, 9.5:1 compression ratio and the 266-degree camshaft, which was originally used in 1969 and 1970 VAM Javelins, as well as 1970 and 1971 Rambler Classics (Rebel and Matador). Unlike the exclusive high-performance version of the 1970-1971 232 Rally engine, the 252 six was a regular production unit. The only exception to this was the exclusive high-flow version of the Carter RBS single-barrel carburetor, named Carter RBS-PV1, developed by VAM's engineers. The "232 SIX" emblems were replaced with "252" design.

For 1973, VAM sought to standardize and consolidate as many parts and components to cut costs. Both the 232 and 252 engine series were discontinued in favor of the higher-output 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS) 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 as the standard models. The engine now shared the same crankshaft as VAM's new 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 was introduced in the 1971 VAM Javelin. The larger-displacement engine featured unique head and exhaust porting designs with larger intake and exhaust valves, along with dished pistons with a 3.909 in (99.3 mm) bore and 3.894 in (98.9 mm) stroke. The increase in displacement was achieved by a 0.06 in (1.5 mm) larger bore than the 258 I6. The rear differential gear ratio changed from 3.54:1 to 3.31:1. The taillights were revised. High-back bucket seats were available, shared with the second-generation VAM Javelin. Unlike previous seat backs, these did not include a reclining mechanism. New side panel designs were accompanied by a now standard parcel shelf incorporating both courtesy lights. The front end was updated as in the standard Rambler American models, except for the blackout grille. The engine displacement emblems changed the last digit to eight while keeping the same design as last year's units. The rectangular "Rambler" rear emblem was removed and its place was taken by the manuscript "Rally" unit that was no longer on the front fenders.

The 1974 Rallys were mostly unchanged from the 1973s. Just like on the Rambler American, their largest difference was the new rear five-mile-per-hour bumper and relocated rear license plate. These models incorporated the first design of VAM's original five-spoke wheels, which carried full volcano-shaped hubcaps and trim rings. Wheel covers were not available for this model. For the first time, a set of factory-side stripes adorned the model's exterior, including a manuscript "Rally" emblem on the rear quarter panel, creating a two-tone appearance. The front seats were the same as the year before and were now also shared with the brand-new Classic AMX (Matador X) model. The discontinuation of the original VAM logo in 1973 in favor of the new arrow-type logo meant its removal from the tachometer dial. The shifter was changed into a T-shaped Hurst unit. A new AMC logo on a black background replaced the American Motors script on the transparent acrylic cap of the steering wheel's horn button. The compression ratio of the 258 cu in (4.2 L) engines was reduced from 8.5:1 to 8.3:1.

#### American Rally

The new marketing approach for VAM's compact model was also included, changing the name from Rambler American Rally to American Rally. For the first time, VAM sought to reposition the model higher, moving it away from the economical, sporty model status it pioneered, and incorporating luxury features.

The 1975 American Rally, with its new name, received its first redesign of identity emblems, featuring an all-new "RALLY" nameplate in printed letters connected by a background line. Like the former one, it was located on the rear panel between the right taillight and the rear license plate. A new grille, headlight bezels, and parking lights shared with the American and Gremlin lines were now in blackout form. New side decals were discreet lines running the full length of the car, without altering proportions, and incorporated Rally emblems on the front fenders. The interior, for the first time, differed from that of the American model, except for the front seats. Rally emblems appeared etched on the front high corners of the side panels. All previously exposed metal parts, such as the door tops, rear sides, and B-pillar, were now upholstered in vinyl. The "RAMBLER" emblem on the glove box was replaced by a "RALLY" one of the same design. Unlike all of its predecessors, a considerable number of 1975 American Rally units were equipped with the heater as standard. The aspect that made the American Rally the most different from the last generation was the engines. The 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 came with an all-new Prestolite electronic ignition system. Manual front disk brakes replaced the previous drums. A new TREMEC 170-F four-speed manual transmission with Hurst linkage was available from the factory. However, VAM was unable to standardize it fully, and several Hurst-linked three-speed 1975 American Rally versions were built.

Since 1973, the growing problem of air pollution (especially in Mexico City) forced the Mexican government to begin emission certification of all engines produced in the country starting in 1974. This would affect all high-compression engines of all marques. For this reason, the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 had dropped from an 8.5:1 to 8.3:1 compression compression between 1973 and 1974. However, this change was not enough to comply with government standards, and VAM was forced to further reduce compression in mid-1974. This meant a 7.6:1 compression ratio for the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 for the second half of the year production of the 1974 Rambler American Rally. For this reason, this model, along with the 1975 American Rally, became the lowest-performing examples of VAM's original compact sporty model, ending even below the standard 155 hp (116 kW; 157 PS) 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 of the 1969 Rambler American Rally and the stock 232 1970–1972 Rambler American two-door sedans. Improvements in the form of the four-speed transmission and electronic ignition were insufficient.

In 1976, VAM introduced the Gremlin X in Mexico, retaking the economical sporty concept originally held by the Rally model. Engineers improved the output of the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 without increasing gas emissions by adopting a higher 8.0:1 compression ratio. This, along with the subcompact's lighter body, made the 1976 Gremlin X outperform the low-compression 1975 American Rally even though it was not offered with the new four-speed transmission. To avoid internal competition between the performance models and further push the line's concept change, VAM upgraded the American Rally to differentiate it from the new subcompact model. The 1976 models switched to the 200 hp (149 kW; 203 PS) 7.7:1 compression ratio VAM 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 with Holley 2300 two-barrel carburetor and 266-degree camshaft, shared with the VAM Pacer and all Classic models. This marked for the first time the presence of VAM's largest engine in the Hornet-based compact line. Changes to the 258 six were still in process for the 282 as well, so the existing version was continued. The 1976 American Rally had improved performance with its higher displacement, large-diameter valves, larger intake manifold, and larger carburetor. The model outperformed its predecessors except for the 1972 Rambler American Rally with its 9.5:1 compression ratio 252 cu in (4.1 L) I6, which was still half a second faster despite its high-flow one-barrel carburetor, small intake manifold, three-speed transmission, higher numerical rear gear ratio, and lower displacement.

Additionally, the 1976 American Rally included improvements such as power front disc brakes, power steering, and a tinted windshield as standard equipment. The four-speed transmission and heater were also standard. New seat patterns and door panel designs (without the etched Rally emblem) were used, while gauges were changed to a 160 km/h speedometer and a 6,000 RPM tachometer. New dome light lens design and longer sun visors were shared with the American and Gremlin. The new engine and standard equipment, coupled with the mid-year discontinuation of the 1976 Classic AMX (Matador X), made the American Rally the company's top-of-the-line performance model. The sportiness and concept were fairly close to those of the 1972–1976 VAM Javelins and Classic AMXs. With the engine change, the rear quarter panel emblems morphed into "4.6" units. After only one year, the model name "Rally" emblem on the rear panel was redesigned again.

The 1977 models incorporated engineering upgrades for the 258 six the year before the 282 engine. All-new head design with quench-type combustion chambers raised the compression ratio from 7.7:1 to 8.0:1. It was accompanied by a new aluminum intake manifold with improved flow, while retaining the Holley 2300 two-barrel carburetor. These improvements made the 1977 American Rally the best-performing model of its series, even surpassing the high-compression 1972 model. Despite this, advertised horsepower and torque ratings were the same as the year before. The power increase enabled the use of a new 3.07:1 rear differential gear ratio for better fuel economy and top speed, without sacrificing acceleration or towing capacity. The front high-back bucket seats received new patterns, and for the first time since the 1972 reclining mechanism (as standard equipment), three-point front seatbelts with double retractable mechanisms were added. A new VAM-designed digital tachometer replaced the conventional analog unit in the midyear. The exterior featured the new Gremlin front clip. New decals covering only the topsides of the front fenders started near the doors, at the side marker lights. Between the lights and the stripe was a "Rally 4.6" sticker. Like the three luxury versions of the line for the year, the 1977 American Rally was the first unit of its series to offer the original factory air conditioning system as an option. The hood and trunk lights, as well as the glove box unit, were added to the standard equipment list.

The Rally included D70x14 radial tires in all years and rear gear ratios of 3.54:1 (1970–1972), 3.31:1 (1973–1976), and 3.07:1 (1977). The American Rally was discontinued in 1977 along with all other Hornet-based VAM Americans. It would be succeeded by the 1978 American Rally AMX model (VAM's version of the 1978 AMC Concord AMX), marking the first time AMC produced its hatchback coupe body style in Mexico. Unlike the AMC Hornet X models, neither the Hornet-based Rambler American Rally nor the American Rally was ever available with V8 engines, automatic transmissions, or column-mounted shifters. The Rally model was more than just an appearance package, but it was also not as strong as a muscle car. Its closest American equivalent is the 1972 Hornet Rallye-X model. It is regarded as one of VAM's most collectible models.

#### American ECD

As part of the shift in market strategy for VAM's Hornet-based compacts for 1975 that included advancements in the American base model and American Rally, the introduction of the new American ECD or "Edición Cantos Dorados" (English: Golden Edges Edition). It represented for the first time that a VAM four-door compact was not an economy base model. The American ECD was VAM's first regular-production luxury compact, following the two-door hardtops of 1963 and 1965, which were marketed as the Rambler American Hardtop (equivalent to the Rambler American 440H in the U.S. and Canada). The ECD was restricted to the four-door sedan, while the 1975 American Rally was the high-trim two-door sedan. The station wagon remained a single-edition model. The American ECD was equivalent in the U.S. to the 1975 four-door Hornet DL model.

The 1975 American ECD came standard with a 170 hp (127 kW; 172 PS) 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine with a single-barrel Carter carburetor, an electronic ignition, a 266-degree camshaft, and a 7.6:1 compression ratio with a regular cooling system. Included were manual front disk brakes with rear drums, power steering, heavy-duty suspension with front sway bar, Chrysler TorqueFlite A904 three-speed automatic transmission, and a 3.31:1 rear gear ratio. The exterior included a full vinyl roof with bright moldings, standard bright molding package (wheel lip, rocker panels, drip rails, and between taillights molding), luxury wheel covers, "American" and "Automático" emblems on the rear panel, "258" emblems on rear quarter panels, and golden "ECD" emblems over the base of the C-pillars. Standard equipment also consisted of front and rear bench seats, front two-point seatbelts, front and rear armrests, luxury upholstery, custom steering wheel, column-mounted shifter, color-keyed padded dashboard, gauges for fuel and coolant temperature as well as warning lights (brakes, oil, and electrical system), a 200 km/h speedometer, vacuum gauge, front ashtray, cigarette lighter, heater with front defroster, AM monaural radio with a single speaker and antenna, locking glove box, parcel shelf, courtesy lights, padded sun visors, day/night rearview mirror, heat and sound insulating cardboard-type headliner, round dome light, dual coat hooks, rear ashtray mounted on the front seatback, and driver's side remote mirror. Optional equipment included passenger's side mirror, remote-controlled driver's side mirror, power brakes, bumper guards, tinted windshield, light group, and others.

The 1976 American ECD included the same upgrades as the rest of the American line. These were longer sun visors, a 160 km/h speedometer, a new dome light lens, and a higher 8.0:1 compression ratio on the 258 six. A rear defroster was added to the options list while the tinted windshield became standard. The luxury seat patterns and wheel covers were redesigned. An electric analog clock appeared to the right of the speedometer, although several models kept the vacuum gauge. A new model for the year was the two-door American ECD. This model was a limited-edition luxury American two-door sedan comparable to the 1960s Rambler American hardtops. The equipment was the same as the four-door American ECD, with some differences. The engine on this model was the 200 hp (149 kW; 203 PS) 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 featuring a Holley 2300 two-barrel carburetor, 7.7:1 compression ratio, 266-degree camshaft, and electronic ignition. The automatic transmission was a floor-mounted shift design, a first in a VAM Hornet-based American. The front seats were upgraded to high-back individual non-reclining units, replacing the four-door bench.

The American ECD was once again restricted to the four-door sedan only for 1977. The model incorporated the new Gremlin front clip, as did the rest of the American line for the year. New "4.2" units replaced the "258" engine displacement emblems, and the bumper guards were included at no charge. Power brakes were made standard. Most of the light group was also installed as standard, which added illumination for the engine, trunk, and glove box. The electric clock was fully standardized in all units. Front seat belts were upgraded to three-point retractable units. The rear seatback received a concealed fold-down armrest. AMC's factory air conditioning system was added to the options. The Carter RBS one-barrel carburetor was discontinued, leaving only the Carter YF model.

#### American GFS

The automaker sought to reposition the two-door 1976 American ECD from limited-edition status to regular production and to change consumer perception from general luxury to the personal luxury car segment, a category VAM no longer offered after the mid-1976 discontinuation of the Classic Brougham (Matador Brougham coupe) model. A group of employees planned to take advantage of the upcoming new model to pay homage to VAM's general manager, Gabriel Fernández Sáyago, one of the most respected in the Mexican auto industry at the time, and VAM's leader since 1946. The new personal luxury compact was named after him, using his initials as a designation. The model was presented to him as a surprise in late 1976, which he appreciated greatly, but, opting for a more humble stance, he requested that the model not bear his name. The employees respected his decision but managed to keep their original plan in place indirectly. The general manager's initials were retained, but the meaning was changed to "Grand Formula Sport." The model was introduced alongside VAM's 1977 lineup as a two-door alternative to the American ECD and a luxury alternative to the American Rally.

The 1977 American GFS incorporated the same appearance and equipment novelties as the American ECD of the same year. Like the two-door 1976 American ECD, the model retained the individual front seat and floor-mounted automatic transmission configuration, with the notable difference of standard reclining mechanisms. The 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 incorporated new head and intake manifold designs as well as the 3.07:1 rear gear ratio from the American Rally model of that year. Unique to the 1977 American GFS was its design of rear side windows and roof. VAM designers created a half-landau-type vinyl-covered roof that included the over the roof targa band that AMC used for its 1977 Hornet AMX models and partially covered the flip-open rear side windows, creating a thicker B-pillar. American Motors adopted this design for its 1978 and 1979 Concord DL/Limited two-door models, but without the targa trim.

#### Camioneta Automática

New for 1977 was VAM's first station wagon that was not an economy-based model, the first in 17 years. This was included with the optional automatic transmission. Like the American GFS, the engine changed from the 282 cu in (4.6 L) to the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 version with a 3.07:1 rear differential gear ratio. Like the American ECD, it shared the column-mounted gearshift, high-trimmed-upholstered bench seats (with a fold-down rear unit), and special door panels. Shared with both luxury sedans were power brakes, power steering, heavy-duty suspension, bumper guards, full bright molding package, luxury wheel covers, "4.6" emblems (GFS only), tinted windshield, luxury steering wheel, electric analog clock, parcel shelf, full light group (except reading dome light), as well as other updates for the model year. This introduced a luxury wagon to VAM's lineup for the first time. However, the low-priced base wagon was no longer available with an automatic transmission. VAM wagons with this package did not have a name because it was not a trim level, but VAM and printed materials described it as the "Camioneta Automática" (automatic wagon). Starting in 1979, and based on the U.S. market Concord station wagon, it was now named "American DL".

### South Africa

South Africa was the first international market that AMC entered the right-hand drive production of the Hornet. Before the Hornet, the Rambler American was assembled in South Africa first by National Motor Assemblers Limited (NMA) in Durban and in 1968 at the Datsun assembly facility, Rosslyn Motor Assemblers. In 1969 Rambler production was moved to the former Chrysler plant, Motor Assemblies Limited (MA) in Durban, which had come under the control of Toyota South Africa Motors in 1964.

Motor Assemblies Limited built the American for its final year and in 1970 was its replacement the AMC Hornet four-door sedan. The initial design and engineering work to right-hand drive conversion for South Africa became the blueprints used right-hand drive Hornets that were assembled in Australia. As with all AMC's export markets, the Hornet was marketed in South Africa as "Rambler."

The Rambler Hornet was advertised as being "built and marketed in South Africa by Toyota South Africa Ltd, wholly owned and controlled by South Africans ... sold and serviced country-wide by 220 Toyota dealers." The Hornet was marketed through 1971.

American Motors South Africa (Proprietary) Limited was the official license holder for the production of the Rambler Hornet at the Motor Assemblies plant. However, latter production was hampered by problems arising from regulations. The nation's tariff structure considered only the weight of parts or materials made in South Africa would be calculated toward local content requirements. The objective was to increase indigenous production. As a result, the last of the South African-built Rambler Hornets came equipped with 4.1 L (250 cu in) Chevrolet straight-6 engines. The objective was to standardize the manufacture of vehicle components within South Africa. Because of this, the Hornet's original AMC engine was eliminated from the marketplace, while the switch also provided greater local production volume for the General Motors engine.

A total of 840 Hornets were built at the Motor Assemblies plant.


## Motorsports

AMC Hornets were campaigned in various motorsports events. Some technical and financial support was provided by the automaker in the early years.

### Stock Car Racing

Bobby Allison was AMC's factory-backed NASCAR driver, racing #12 AMC Matadors fielded by Roger Penske. Allison also participated in short-track racing, often using a modified stock car that he re-bodied using the Hornet's sheet metal, painted in the AMC's red/white/blue racing livery and numbered 12.

### Drag racing

Hornets were campaigned on dragstrips from 1972 and became well known by their bold red, white, and blue graphics. Dave Street was an early Hornet racer in Northeast Pro Stock events. Drivers on the Pro Stock circuit included Wally Booth (backed by AMC until 1974), as well as Rich Maskin and Dave Kanners captured top awards. Booth drove a Hornet to the top qualifying spot at the 1975 NHRA U.S. Nationals.

Some drivers converted from AMC Gremlins when tests with identical engines in 1973 showed that the hatchback Hornet had an advantage with higher speeds and lower times. The 1974 Gatornationals, as well as the 1976 NHRA U.S. Nationals and the World Finals were won by Wally Booth driving an AMC Hornet. The Hornets would do the quarter-mile in 8 seconds reaching 150 mph (241 km/h).

The last AMC Pro Stocker was campaigned through the 1982 season in American Hot Rod Association events. It was a Hornet AMX with nitrous injection.

### Endurance

In 1970, Lou Haratz drove an AMC Hornet over 14,000 miles (22,531 km) to set a new Trans-Americas record by going from Ushuaia, Argentina to Fairbanks, Alaska in 30 days and 45 minutes. He also went on to be the first to drive completely around the widest practical perimeter of the North, Central, and South American continents for a distance of 38,472 miles (61,915 km) in 143 days. The Hornet received a tune-up service in Caracas as well as in Lima, and the endurance record was promoted in various popular magazine advertisements for Champion spark plugs that were standard equipment in AMC engines.

### IMSA racing

From 1971 the AMC Hornet was campaigned in the International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) races. Hornets ran in GTO class (Grand Touring type with engines of 2.5 L or more) and American Challenge (AC) class. American Motors provided only limited support in the form of technical help. The cars were gutted and powered by highly modified AMC 232 straight-six engines.

In 1973, AMC cars very nearly placed 1-2-3, in a BF Goodrich Radial Challenge Series race, but Bob Hennig driving an AMC Hornet went out while in third place with only six laps to go. BMW driver Nick Craw and AMC Hornet driver Amos Johnson ended the IMSA series as co-champions in Class B.

On 6 February 1977, out of 57 cars that started the 24-Hours of Daytona, Championship of Makes, at Daytona International Speedway, an AMC Hornet driven by Tom Waugh, John Rulon-Miller, and Bob Punch drove car #15 to 22nd place overall and 12th in the GTO class by completing 394 laps going 1,582 miles (2,546 km).

Amos Johnson drove car #7, an AC Class Hornet, in the 100-mile Road Atlanta race on 17 April 1977, as well as with co-driver Dennis Shaw to finish 11th in the Hallett Motor Racing Circuit on 24 July 1977.

A 1977 Hornet AMX was prepared by "Team Highball" from North Carolina and driven by Amos Johnson and Dennis Shaw. Car #77 finished in 34th place in the GTO class out of the 68 that started the race by completing 475 laps, 1,824 miles (2,935 km) in the 17th Annual 24 Hours of Daytona Camel GT Challenge.

The AMC cars "were killers at places like Daytona. Despite being about as aerodynamic as a brick they had those nice, big, reliable straight sixes ..."

### SCCA Trans Am

Buzz Dyer drove a 1977 AMC Hornet AMX (car #77) with a V8 engine in the Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) Trans Am events at the Laguna Seca Raceway on 8 October 1978 and finished 46 laps.

### Coast-to-coast run

Two *Hot Rod* staffers, John Fuchs and Clyde Baker, entered a 1972 AMC Hornet in the Cannonball Baker Sea-to-Shining-Sea Memorial Trophy Dash. This was an unofficial automobile race from New York City and Darien, CT, on the U.S. Atlantic coast, to Redondo Beach, a Los Angeles suburb on the Pacific coast during the time of the newly imposed 55 mph (89 km/h) speed limit set by the National Maximum Speed Law. The Hornet X hatchback was modified with a 401 cu in (6.6 L) AMC V8 and auxiliary racing fuel cells to increase gasoline capacity. They finished in 13th place after driving for 41 hours and 15 minutes at an average speed of 70.4 mph (113 km/h).
