---
title: "Doxygen: Special Commands (part 2/3)"
source: https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html
domain: doxygen
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: doxygen docs, documentation generator, api documentation, source comments
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/3
---

## --- Section indicators ---

# \attention { attention text }

Starts a paragraph where a message that needs attention may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\attention` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. The `\attention` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \author { list of authors }

Starts a paragraph where one or more author names may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\author` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each author description will start a new line. Alternatively, one `\author` command may mention several authors. The `\author` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

**Example:**

class

SomeNiceClass {};

Click

here

for the corresponding HTML documentation that is generated by Doxygen.

# \authors { list of authors }

Equivalent to \author.

# \brief { brief description }

Starts a paragraph that serves as a brief description. For classes and files the brief description will be used in lists and at the start of the documentation page. For class and file members, the brief description will be placed at the declaration of the member and prepended to the detailed description. A brief description may span several lines (although it is advised to keep it brief!). A brief description ends when a blank line or another sectioning command is encountered. If multiple `\brief` commands are present they will be joined. See section \author for an example.

Synonymous to \short.

# \bug { bug description }

Starts a paragraph where one or more bugs may be reported. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\bug` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each bug description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\bug` command may mention several bugs. The `\bug` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \author for an example.

The description will also add an item to a separate Bug list and the two instances of the description will be cross-referenced. Each item in the Bug list will be preceded by a header that indicates the origin of the item.

The Bug list and the corresponding entries can be disabled by setting the GENERATE_BUGLIST to NO.

# \cond [(section-label)]

Starts a conditional section that ends with a corresponding \endcond command, which is typically found in another comment block. The main purpose of this pair of commands is to (conditionally) exclude part of a file from processing (in older version of Doxygen this could only be achieved using C preprocessor commands).

The section between `\cond` and \endcond can be included by adding its section label to the ENABLED_SECTIONS configuration option. If the section label is omitted, the section will be excluded from processing unconditionally. The section label can be a logical expression build of section labels, round brackets, && (AND), || (OR) and ! (NOT). If you use an expression you need to wrap it in round brackets, i.e \cond (!LABEL1 && LABEL2).

For conditional sections within a comment block one should use a \if ... \endif block. When using `\cond` and the condition is not satisfied the current comment block is ended and everything until the matching \endcond is removed and a new command block is started there.

Conditional sections can be nested. In this case a nested section will only be shown if it and its containing section are included.

Here is an example showing the commands in action:

```
/** An interface */
class Intf
{
  public:
    /** A method */
    virtual void func() = 0;

    /// @cond TEST

    /** A method used for testing */
    virtual void test() = 0;

    /// @endcond
};

/// @cond DEV
/*
 *  The implementation of the interface
 */
class Implementation : public Intf
{
  public:
    void func();

    /// @cond TEST
    void test();
    /// @endcond

    /// @cond
    /** This method is obsolete and does
     *  not show up in the documentation.
     */
    void obsolete();
    /// @endcond
};

/// @endcond
```

The output will be different depending on whether or not ENABLED_SECTIONS contains `TEST`, or `DEV`

**See also**

sections

\if

,

\ifnot

,

\else

,

\elseif

,

\endif

,

\endcond

, and

ENABLED_SECTIONS

.

**Note**

Due to the moment of parsing the

\cond

and

\endcond

commands cannot be used in

ALIASES

.

# \copyright { copyright description }

Starts a paragraph where the copyright of an entity can be described. This paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. See section \author for an example.

# \date { date description }

Starts a paragraph where one or more dates may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\date` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each date description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\date` command may mention several dates. The `\date` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \author for an example.

# \showdate "<format>" [ <date_time> ]

Shows the date and time based on the given <format> and <date_time>. Where the <format> is a string in which the following tokens have a special meaning:

| Code | Description |
|---|---|
| %y | Year without century as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %Y | Year with century as a decimal number. |
| %m | Month as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-m | The month as a decimal number. |
| %b | Month as locale’s abbreviated name. |
| %B | Month as locale’s full name. |
| %d | Day of the month as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-d | Day of the month as a decimal number. |
| %u | The weekday as a decimal number (1-7), where Monday is 1. |
| %w | The weekday as a decimal number (0-6), where Sunday is 0. |
| %a | Weekday as locale’s abbreviated name. |
| %A | Weekday as locale’s full name. |
|   |   |
| %H | Hour (24-hour clock) as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-H | Hour (24-hour clock) as a decimal number. |
| %I | Hour (12-hour clock) as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-I | Hour (12-hour clock) as a decimal number. |
| %M | Minute as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-M | Minute as a decimal number. |
| %S | Second as a zero-padded decimal number. |
| %-S | Second as a decimal number. |
| %p | Locale’s equivalent of either AM or PM. |
|   |   |
| %% | A % character. |

Note that the <format> has to be between double quotes.

In case the <date_time> is specified it has to have the following representation:

- optional date where date is:
  - 4 digits for the year
  - a minus sign
  - one or 2 digits for the month
  - a minus sign
  - one or 2 digits for the day
- optional time where time is:
  - whitespace
  - one or 2 digits for the hours
  - a colon sign
  - one or 2 digits for the minutes
  - when the format contains %S or %-S
    - a colon sign
    - 2 digits for the seconds

in case the <date_time> is not specified the current date and time are used.

Here is an example:

- \showdate

"%A %d-%m-%Y"

2015-3-14

- \showdate

"%a %d-%m-%y"

2015-3-14

- \showdate

"%-m.%d%y"

2015-3-14

- \showdate

"%A %d-%m-%Y %H:%M:%S"

2015-3-14 03:04:15

- \showdate

"%A %d-%m-%Y %H:%M"

2015-3-14 03:04

In case OUTPUT_LANGUAGE=english this results in:

- Saturday 14-03-2015
- Sat 14-03-15
- 3.1415
- Saturday 14-03-15 03:04:15
- Saturday 14-03-15 03:04

In case OUTPUT_LANGUAGE=dutch this results in:

- zaterdag 14-03-15
- za 14-03-2015
- 3.1415
- zaterdag 14-03-15 03:04:15
- zaterdag 14-03-15 03:04

# \deprecated { description }

Starts a paragraph indicating that this documentation block belongs to a deprecated entity. Can be used to describe alternatives, expected life span, etc. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\deprecated` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each deprecation description will start on a new line. The `\deprecated` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

The description will also add an item to a separate Deprecated list and the two instances of the description will be cross-referenced. Each item in the Deprecated list will be preceded by a header that indicates the origin of the item.

The Deprecated list and the corresponding entries can be disabled by setting the GENERATE_DEPRECATEDLIST to NO.

# \details { detailed description }

Just like \brief starts a brief description, `\details` starts the detailed description. You can also start a new paragraph (blank line) then the `\details` command is not needed.

# \noop ( text to be ignored )

All the text, including the command, till the end of the line is ignored. The command will most commonly be used in combination with ALIASES to ignore not supported commands that are present for e.g. other processing tools.

# \raisewarning ( text to be shown as warning )

All the text, excluding the command, till the end of the line is literally shown as a documentation warning. The text, including the command, is removed from the output. The command will most commonly be used in combination with ALIASES to show a specific warning.

**Example:**

```
\raisewarning My specific warning

\warnNoDoc

\warnNoDoc{My specific warning}
```

together with:

```
ALIASES  = warnNoDoc="\raisewarning Missing documentation"
ALIASES += warnNoDoc{1}="\raisewarning Incomplete documentation: \1"
```

will result in:

```
   ex_1.md:1: warning: My specific warning
   ex_1.md:3: warning: Missing documentation
   ex_1.md:5: warning: Incomplete documentation: My specific warning
```

# \else

Starts a conditional section if the previous conditional section was not enabled. The previous section should have been started with a \if, \ifnot, or \elseif command.

**See also**

sections

\if

,

\ifnot

,

\elseif

,

\endif.

# \elseif (section-label)

Starts a conditional documentation section if the previous section was not enabled. A conditional section is disabled by default. To enable it you must put the section-label after the ENABLED_SECTIONS tag in the configuration file. The section label can be a logical expression build of section names, round brackets, && (AND), || (OR) and ! (NOT). Conditional blocks can be nested. A nested section is only enabled if all enclosing sections are enabled as well.

**See also**

sections

\if

,

\ifnot

,

\else

,

\endif.

# \endcond

Ends a conditional section that was started by \cond.

**See also**

section

\cond

.

**Note**

Due to the moment of parsing the

\endcond

and

\cond

commands cannot be used in

ALIASES

.

# \endif

Ends a conditional section that was started by \if or \ifnot For each \if or \ifnot one and only one matching \endif must follow.

**See also**

sections

\if

,

\ifnot

,

\else

,

\elseif.

# \exception <exception-object> { exception description }

Starts an exception description for an exception object with name <exception-object>. Followed by a description of the exception. The existence of the exception object is not checked. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\exception` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each exception description will start on a new line. The `\exception` description ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \fn for an example.

# \if (section-label)

Starts a conditional documentation section. The section ends with a matching \endif command. A conditional section is disabled by default. To enable it you must put the section-label after the ENABLED_SECTIONS tag in the configuration file.

The section label can be a logical expression build of section names, round brackets, && (AND), || (OR) and ! (NOT). If you use an expression you need to wrap it in round brackets, i.e \if (!LABEL1 && LABEL2).

Conditional blocks can be nested. A nested section is only enabled if all enclosing sections are enabled as well.

The `\if` and corresponding \endif have to be in the same comment block. When a conditional block needs to span more than one comment block one has to use \cond ... \endcond.

**Example:**

```
  /*! Unconditionally shown documentation.
   *  \if Cond1
   *    Only included if Cond1 is set.
   *  \endif
   *  \if Cond2
   *    Only included if Cond2 is set.
   *    \if Cond3
   *      Only included if Cond2 and Cond3 are set.
   *    \endif
   *    More text.
   *  \endif
   *  Unconditional text.
   */
```

You can also use conditional commands inside aliases. To document a class in two languages you could for instance use:

**Example 2:**

```
/*! \english
 *  This is English.
 *  \endenglish
 *  \dutch
 *  Dit is Nederlands.
 *  \enddutch
 */
class Example
{
};
```

Where the following aliases are defined in the configuration file:

```
ALIASES  = "english=\if english" \
           "endenglish=\endif" \
           "dutch=\if dutch" \
           "enddutch=\endif"
```

and ENABLED_SECTIONS can be used to enable either `english` or `dutch`.

**See also**

sections

\endif

,

\ifnot

,

\else

,

\elseif

,

\cond

,

\endcond

, and

ENABLED_SECTIONS

.

# \ifnot (section-label)

Starts a conditional documentation section. The section ends with a matching \endif command. This conditional section is enabled by default. To disable it you must put the section-label after the ENABLED_SECTIONS tag in the configuration file. The section label can be a logical expression build of section names, round brackets, && (AND), || (OR) and ! (NOT).

**See also**

sections

\endif

,

\if

,

\else

, and

\elseif

,

\cond

,

\endcond

, and

ENABLED_SECTIONS

.

# \important { important text }

Starts a paragraph where a message that needs important may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\important` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. The `\important` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \invariant { description of invariant }

Starts a paragraph where the invariant of an entity can be described. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\invariant` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each invariant description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\invariant` command may mention several invariants. The `\invariant` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \note { text }

Starts a paragraph where a note can be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\note` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each note description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\note` command may mention several notes. The `\note` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \par for an example.

# \par [(paragraph title)] { paragraph }

If a paragraph title is given this command starts a paragraph with a user defined heading. The heading extends until the end of the line. The paragraph following the command will be indented.

If no paragraph title is given this command will start a new paragraph. This will also work inside other paragraph commands (like \param or \warning) without ending that command.

The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. The `\par` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

**Example:**

class

Par_Test {};

Click

here

for the corresponding HTML documentation that is generated by Doxygen.

# \param[<dir>] <parameter-name> { parameter description }

Starts a parameter description for a function parameter with name <parameter-name>, followed by a description of the parameter. The existence of the parameter is checked and a warning is given if the documentation of this (or any other) parameter is missing or not present in the function declaration or definition.

The `\param` command has an optional attribute, <dir>, specifying the direction of the parameter. Possible values are "[in]", "[out]", and "[in,out]"; note the [square] brackets in this description. For the bidirectional values, directions "in" and "out" can be specified in any order, and they can either be written together (without separator), or separated with a comma (,) or a space. That means that for example values "[outin]" or "[in out]" are also valid. Note that it is also possible to put whitespace between the command and the <dir>. When a parameter is both input and output, [in,out] is used as attribute. Here is an example for the function `memcpy:`

void

memcpy(

void

*dest,

const

void

*src,

size_t

n);

The parameter description is a paragraph with no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph.

Multiple adjacent `\param` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each parameter description will start on a new line. The `\param` description ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \fn for an example.

The parameter name is normally the name given in the function signature. For unnamed parameters, a positional index can also be used (starting with 1 for the first parameter).

class

Base

{

public

:

virtual

void

method(

int

,

int

) = 0;

};

class

Derived :

public

Base

{

public

:

void

method(

int

x,

int

y)

override

;

};

Alternatively, a minus sign (-) can be used as placeholder for the name of an unnamed parameter.

void

foo(

int

,

int

)

{

}

Both ordinal position (numeric) and dash (-) parameter names are rendered as a dash in the output, unless a later definition or overriding method provides the actual parameter names, as is the case in the `Derived` class in the example above.

Note that you can also document multiple parameters with a single `\param` command using a comma-separated list. Here is an example:

void

setPosition(

double

x,

double

y,

double

z)

{

}

Note that for PHP one can also specify the type (or types if you separate them with a pipe symbol) which are allowed for a parameter (as this is not part of the definition). The syntax is the same as for the phpDocumentor, i.e.

```
\param  datatype1|datatype2 $paramname description
```

# \parblock

For commands that expect a single paragraph as argument (such as \par, \param and \warning), the \parblock command allows to start a description that covers multiple paragraphs, which then ends with \endparblock.

Example:

```
/** Example of a param command with a description consisting of two paragraphs
 *  \param p
 *  \parblock
 *  First paragraph of the param description.
 *
 *  Second paragraph of the param description.
 *  \endparblock
 *  Rest of the comment block continues.
 */
```

Note that the `\parblock` command may also appear directly after \param's first argument.

# \endparblock

This ends a block of paragraphs started with \parblock.

# \tparam <template-parameter-name> { description }

Starts a template parameter for a class or function template parameter with name <template-parameter-name>, followed by a description of the template parameter.

Otherwise similar to \param.

# \post { description of the postcondition }

Starts a paragraph where the postcondition of an entity can be described. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\post` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each postcondition will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\post` command may mention several postconditions. The `\post` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \pre { description of the precondition }

Starts a paragraph where the precondition of an entity can be described. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\pre` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each precondition will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\pre` command may mention several preconditions. The `\pre` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \remark { remark text }

Starts a paragraph where one or more remarks may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\remark` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each remark will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\remark` command may mention several remarks. The `\remark` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \remarks { remark text }

Equivalent to \remark.

# \result { description of the result value }

Equivalent to \return.

# \return { description of the return value }

Starts a return value description for a function. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\return` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. The `\return` description ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \fn for an example.

# \returns { description of the return value }

Equivalent to \return.

# \retval <return value> { description }

Starts a description for a function's return value with name <return value>, followed by a description of the return value. The text of the paragraph that forms the description has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\retval` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each return value description will start on a new line. The `\retval` description ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \sa { references }

Starts a paragraph where one or more cross-references to classes, functions, methods, variables, files or URL may be specified. Two names joined by either `::` or `#` are understood as referring to a class and one of its members. One of several overloaded methods or constructors may be selected by including a parenthesized list of argument types after the method name.

Synonymous to \see.

**See also**

section

autolink

for information on how to create links to objects.

# \see { references }

Equivalent to \sa. Introduced for compatibility with Javadoc.

# \short { short description }

Equivalent to \brief.

# \since { text }

This command can be used to specify since when (version or time) an entity is available. The paragraph that follows `\since` does not have any special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. The `\since` description ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

# \test { paragraph describing a test case }

Starts a paragraph where one or more test cases can be described. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\test` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each test case description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\test` command may mention several test cases. The `\test` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

The description will also add an item to a separate Test list and the two instances of the description will be cross-referenced. Each item in the Test list will be preceded by a header that indicates the origin of the item.

The Test list and the corresponding entries can be disabled by setting the GENERATE_TESTLIST to NO.

# \throw <exception-object> { exception description }

Synonymous \exception.

**Note:**

the command

\throws

is a synonym for this command.

**See also**

section

\exception

# \throws <exception-object> { exception description }

Equivalent to \throw.

# \todo { paragraph describing what is to be done }

Starts a paragraph where one or more todo items are described. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\todo` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each todo description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\todo` command may mention several todo descriptions. The `\todo` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered.

The description will also add an item to a separate Todo list and the two instances of the description will be cross-referenced. Each item in the Todo list will be preceded by a header that indicates the origin of the item.

The Todo list and the corresponding entries can be disabled by setting the GENERATE_TODOLIST to NO.

# \version { version number }

Starts a paragraph where one or more version strings may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\version` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each version description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\version` command may mention several version strings. The \version command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \author for an example.

# \warning { warning message }

Starts a paragraph where one or more warning messages may be entered. The paragraph will be indented. The text of the paragraph has no special internal structure. All visual enhancement commands may be used inside the paragraph. Multiple adjacent `\warning` commands will be joined into a single paragraph. Each warning description will start on a new line. Alternatively, one `\warning` command may mention several warnings. The `\warning` command ends when a blank line or some other sectioning command is encountered. See section \author for an example.

# \xrefitem <key> "heading" "list title" { text }

This command is a generalization of commands such as \todo and \bug. It can be used to create user-defined text sections which are automatically cross-referenced between the place of occurrence and a related page, which will be generated. On the related page all sections of the same type will be collected.

The first argument <key> is an identifier uniquely representing the type of the section. The second argument is a quoted string representing the heading of the section under which text passed as the fourth argument is put. The third argument (list title) is used as the title for the related page containing all items with the same key. The second and third string argument cannot contain a newline. The keys `"todo"`, `"test"`, `"bug"` and `"deprecated"` are predefined.

To get an idea on how to use the `\xrefitem` command and what its effect is, consider the todo list, which (for English output) can be seen an alias for the command

```
\xrefitem todo "Todo" "Todo List" 
```

Since it is very tedious and error-prone to repeat the first three parameters of the command for each section, the command is meant to be used in combination with the ALIASES option in the configuration file. To define a new command `\reminder`, for instance, one should add the following line to the configuration file:

```
ALIASES += "reminder=\xrefitem reminders \"Reminder\" \"Reminders\"" 
```

Note the use of escaped quotes for the second and third argument of the `\xrefitem` command.

In case parameter "(heading)" is the empty string no heading is generated. This can be useful when used in combination with the \page command e.g.

```
/** @page my_errors My Errors
 *  @brief Errors page
 *
 *  Errors page contents.
 */

/** \error ERROR 101: in case a file can not be opened.
    Check about file system read/write access. */
#define MY_ERR_CANNOT_OPEN_FILE                   101

/** \error ERROR 102: in case a file can not be closed.
    Check about file system read/write access. */
#define MY_ERR_CANNOT_CLOSE_FILE                  102
```

with `\error` defined as

```
ALIASES += "error=\xrefitem my_errors \"\" \"\"" 
```


## --- Commands to create links ---

# \addindex (text)

This command adds (text) to the ({\LaTeX}) , DocBook and RTF index.

# \anchor <word>

This command places an invisible, named anchor into the documentation to which you can refer with the \ref command.

**See also**

section

\ref

.

# \cite['{'[option]'}'] <label>

Adds a bibliographic reference in the text and in the list of bibliographic references. The <label> must be a valid BibTeX label that can be found in one of the .bib files listed in CITE_BIB_FILES. For the ({\LaTeX}) output the formatting of the reference in the text can be configured with LATEX_BIB_STYLE. For other output formats a fixed representation is used. Note that using this command requires the `bibtex` tool to be present in the search path.

There are a number of options possible:

- number, shortauthor, year, these options are mutually exclusive, in case none of these is specified number is assumed.
  - number create a numerical reference
  - shortauthor just the surname of the first author is given, and in case multiple authors are present the text "et al." is added
  - year, the year of publication is mentioned (when specified in the bibtex file).
- nopar, no (square) brackets are added
- nocite, no link to a citation in the bibliography is made (and the reference is not added to the bibliography based on this item)

# \endlink

This command ends a link that is started with the \link command.

**See also**

section

\link

.

# \link <link-object>

The links that are automatically generated by Doxygen always have the name of the object they point to as link-text.

The `\link` command can be used to create a link to an object (a file, class, or member) with a user specified link-text. The link command should end with an \endlink command. All text between the `\link` and \endlink commands serves as text for a link to the <link-object> specified as the first argument of `\link`.

**See also**

Section

autolink

for more information on automatically generated links and valid link-objects.

# \ref <name> ["(text)"]

Creates a reference to a named symbol, file, section, subsection, page or anchor.

For HTML documentation the reference command will generate a link to the section. For a section or subsection the title of the section will be used as the text of the link. For an anchor the optional text between quotes will be used or <name> if no text is specified.

In case <name> has spaces (for instance if it refers a file name containing spaces) you need to add double quotes around the <name>, e.g. "my file.md".

For ({\LaTeX}) documentation the reference command will be the same unless the PDF_HYPERLINKS option has been set to NO, in this case it generates the section title for sections or the text if <name> refers to an anchor followed by a page number.

**See also**

Section

\page

for an example of the

\ref

command.

# \refitem <name>

Just like the \ref command, this command creates a reference to a named section, but this reference appears in a list that is started by \secreflist and ends with \endsecreflist. An example of such a list can be seen at the top of the page.

# \satisfies <req-id> [(short description)]

Creates a reference to a requirement with an optional short description for the link text. The function, class, or other symbol that contain such reference is considered to contribute to the implementation of the requirement. A comment can contain multiple satisfies references pointing to different requirements. There can also be multiple contributors to the implementation of a single requirement, in which case the satisfies command should be mentioned in the documentation of each contributing party.

**See also**

sections

\verifies

and

\requirement

# \verifies <req-id> [(short description)]

Creates a reference to a requirement with an optional short description for the link text. The function, class, or other symbol that contain such reference is considered to contribute to testing/verifying the requirement. A comment can contain multiple verifies references pointing to different requirements. There can also be multiple contributors to test/verify a single requirement, in which case the verifies command should be mentioned in the documentation of each contributing party.

**See also**

sections

\satisfies

and

\requirement

# \secreflist

Starts an index list of item, created with \refitem that each link to a named section.

# \endsecreflist

End an index list started with \secreflist.

# \subpage <name> ["(text)"]

This command can be used to create a hierarchy of pages. The same structure can be made using the \defgroup and \ingroup commands, but for pages the `\subpage` command is often more convenient. The main page (see \mainpage) is typically the root of hierarchy.

This command behaves similar as \ref in the sense that it creates a reference to a page labeled <name> with the optional link text as specified in the second argument.

It differs from the \ref command in that it only works for pages, and creates a parent-child relation between pages, where the child page (or sub page) is identified by label <name>.

See the \section and \subsection commands if you want to add structure without creating multiple pages.

**Note**

Each page can be the sub page of only one other page and no cyclic relations are allowed, i.e. the page hierarchy must have a tree structure.

Here is an example:

```
/*! \mainpage A simple manual

Some general info.

This manual is divided in the following sections:
- \subpage intro
- \subpage advanced "Advanced usage"
*/

//-----------------------------------------------------------

/*! \page intro Introduction
This page introduces the user to the topic.
Now you can proceed to the \ref advanced "advanced section".
*/

//-----------------------------------------------------------

/*! \page advanced Advanced Usage
This page is for advanced users.
Make sure you have first read \ref intro "the introduction".
*/
```

# \tableofcontents['{'[option[:level]][,option[:level]]*'}']

Creates a table of contents at the top of a page, listing all sections and subsections in the page. The option can be HTML or LaTeX or XML or DocBook. When a level is specified this means the maximum nesting level that is shown. The value of level should be in the range 1..6, values outside this range are considered to be 6. In case no level is specified level is set to 6 (show all) In case no option. is specified `\tableofcontents` acts as if just the option HTML and XML was specified. In case of multiple `\tableofcontents` commands in a page the option(s) will be used additional to the already specified option(s), but only the last level of an option is valid.

**Warning**

This command only works inside related page documentation and

not

in other documentation blocks and only has effect in the specified output!

# \section <section-name> (section title)

Creates a section with name <section-name>. The title of the section should be specified as the second argument of the `\section` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside related page documentation and

not

in other documentation blocks!

**See also**

Section

\page

for an example of the

\section

command.

# \subsection <subsection-name> (subsection title)

Creates a subsection with name <subsection-name>. The title of the subsection should be specified as the second argument of the `\subsection` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside a section of a related page documentation block and

not

in other documentation blocks!

**See also**

Section

\page

for an example of the

\subsection

command.

# \subsubsection <subsubsection-name> (subsubsection title)

Creates a subsubsection with name <subsubsection-name>. The title of the subsubsection should be specified as the second argument of the `\subsubsection` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside a subsection of a related page documentation block and

not

in other documentation blocks!

**See also**

Section

\page

for an example of the

\section

command and

\subsection

command.

# \paragraph <paragraph-name> (paragraph title)

Creates a named paragraph with name <paragraph-name>. The title of the paragraph should be specified as the second argument of the `\paragraph` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside a subsubsection of a related page documentation block and

not

in other documentation blocks!

# \subparagraph <subparagraph-name> (subparagraph title)

Creates a named subparagraph with name <subparagraph-name>. The title of the subparagraph should be specified as the second argument of the `\subparagraph` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside a paragraph of a related page documentation block and

not

in other documentation blocks!

# \subsubparagraph <subsubparagraph-name> (subsubparagraph title)

Creates a named subsubparagraph with name <subsubparagraph-name>. The title of the subsubparagraph should be specified as the second argument of the `\subsubparagraph` command.

**Warning**

This command only works inside a subparagraph of a related page documentation block and

not

in other documentation blocks!
