---
title: "1070"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1070
domain: 1152
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1152
fetched: 2026-07-04
---

# 1070

Year **1070** (**MLXX**) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar, the 1070th year of the Common Era (CE) and *Anno Domini* (AD) designations, the 70th year of the 2nd millennium, the 70th year of the 11th century, and the 1st year of the 1070s decade.

## Events

- Spring – King Sweyn II of Denmark joins rebels in England led by Hereward the Wake and captures the Isle of Ely in The Fens of East Anglia. On June 1 Hereward sacks Peterborough Abbey with support from Sweyn's Danes.
- Harrying of the North: William the Conqueror quells rebellions in the north of his Kingdom of England following the invasion by Sweyn II. Widespread famine follows the devastation wrought.
- April 11 – Stigand is deposed as Archbishop of Canterbury in England by papal legates and imprisoned.
- April – Council of Winchester.
- May 1 – After 353 years of being exiled to Lugo due to the Muslim occupation of the city of Braga, the Diocese of Braga is restored by order of Ferdinand I of León under Archbishop Pedro of Braga thanks to the advancing Christian forces during the Reconquista.
- June – Denmark signs a treaty with England; Sweyn II and his forces leave the country.
- June 9 – Kulottunga I begins his reign as Chola emperor in South India.
- August 15 – The Pavian-born Benedictine Lanfranc is appointed as the new Archbishop of Canterbury in England.
- An invasion of England by Malcolm III of Scotland is repelled.
- Hugh d'Avranches, 1st Earl of Chester, the first Marcher Lord, invades Wales, capturing parts of Gwynedd.
- A successful Byzantine counter-attack drives the Seljuq Turks across the Euphrates.
- Bergen is founded by King Olaf III of Norway; it will function as the main city and capital of Norway, until it is replaced by Oslo in 1314.
- Chinese Chancellor Wang Anshi starts the Xining Reforms (which last until 1085).
- Jews from Rouen in Normandy settle in England at the invitation of King William I.
- The Temple of Literature, Hanoi, is established in Hanoi, capital of Vietnam.
- Uyghur poet Yusuf Khass Hajib of Balasagun, in the Kara-Khanid Khanate, completes the *Kutadgu Bilig* ("The Wisdom Which Brings Good Fortune"), and presents it to the prince of Kashgar.
- Song dynasty Chinese astronomer, engineer and statesman Su Song completes the compilation of the *Ben Cao Tu Jing*, a pharmaceutical treatise with related subjects of botany, zoology, mineralogy and metallurgy.
- The rebuilding of Canterbury Cathedral in England following a fire begins.
- The rebuilding of York Minster in England begins.
- Construction of Richmond Castle in North Yorkshire, England, by Alan Rufus begins.
- Approximate date – Halsten Stenkilsson is deposed as king of Sweden, with Håkan the Red becoming king in Götaland, and Anund Gårdske being chosen as king of Svealand.

## Births

- Allucio of Campugliano, Italian diplomat (d. 1134)
- Bertrade de Montfort, queen of France (d. 1117)
- Buthaina bint al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad, Al-Andalus poet
- Coloman (the Learned), king of Hungary (d. 1116)
- Eupraxia of Kiev, Holy Roman Empress (d. 1109)
- Gertrude of Flanders, duchess of Lorraine (d. 1117)
- Giso IV, count of Gudensberg (approximate date)
- Gualfardo of Verona, Italian trader and hermit (d. 1127)
- Guerric of Igny, French abbot (approximate date)
- Henry I (the Elder), German nobleman (d. 1103)
- Hugues de Payens, French knight (approximate date)
- John Komnenos, Byzantine aristocrat and official
- Lothair Udo III, margrave of the Nordmark (d. 1106)
- Meinhard I, German nobleman (approximate date)
- Otto (the Rich), German nobleman (approximate date)
- Ralph of Pont-Echanfray, Norman knight (d. 1120)
- Ramiro Sánchez, Spanish nobleman (approximate date)
- Ranulf le Meschin, 3rd Earl of Chester (d. 1129)
- Rostislav Vsevolodovich, Kievan prince (d. 1093)
- Sancho Nunes de Barbosa, Portuguese nobleman (d. 1130)
- Tescelin le Roux, Burgundian knight (approximate date)
- Thurstan, archbishop of York (approximate date)
- William de Corbeil, archbishop of Canterbury (d. 1136)
- William of Champeaux, French philosopher (d. 1121)

## Deaths

- March 6 – Ulric I (or Oldaric), margrave of Carniola
- April 14 – Gerard (the Great), duke of Lorraine
- June 12 – Guido of Acqui (or Wido), Italian bishop
- July 6
  - Godelieve, Flemish saint (approximate date)
  - Said al-Andalusi, Taghlib Arab astronomer (b. 1029)
- July 17 – Baldwin VI (the Good), count of Flanders
- Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani, Persian physician and chronicler
- Athirajendra Chola, Indian ruler of the Chola Empire
- Áurea of San Millán, Spanish anchorite (b. 1043)
- Bisantius Guirdeliku, Italian nobleman (*patrikios*)
- Filarete of Calabria, Sicilian monk and saint
- Hārūn ibn Malik al-Turk, Turkic military leader
- Theobald of Dorat, French monk and saint (b. 990)
- Vigrahapala III, Indian ruler of the Pala Empire
