---
title: "1129"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1129
domain: 1152
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1152
fetched: 2026-07-04
---

# 1129

Year **1129** (**MCXXIX**) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.

## Events

### By place

#### Europe

- April 14 – Following the Capetian tradition, King Louis VI (**the Fat**) has his eldest son Philip crowned as co-ruler of France at Rheims Cathedral. Louis himself becomes the national protector of all France.
- June 2 – Fulk V, count of Anjou, marries Melisende (daughter of King Baldwin II) the heir to the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Fulk gives up his title which passes to his 15-year-old son, Geoffrey V (**the Fair**).
- September – Roger II of Sicily gains recognition as duke at Melfi from the Norman nobles of Naples, Bari, Capua, Salerno and other cities that have resisted him.
- Burgsteinfurt Castle is built in what is now Steinfurt (modern Germany).

#### Asia

- Jin–Song War: Emperor Gao Zong of the Song dynasty moves the capital from Yangzhou to Hangzhou, after the Jurchen Jin dynasty captures Kaifeng in the Jingkang Incident.
- March 26 – Gao Zong abdicates the throne after a mutiny of the palace guard. His 2-year-old son Zhao Fu succeeds him, but Empress Meng becomes regent and the sole ruler.
- April 20 – Gao Zong regains the throne (with the support of the imperial army led by General Han Shizhong). Zhao Fu is forced to abdicate with Meng having ruled for 25 days.
- July 24 – Former Emperor Shirakawa dies at his native Kyoto. His son Toba begins his cloistered rule, sharing power with Sutoku, a grandson of Shirakawa.

### By topic

#### Religion

- January 23 – Henry of Blois becomes bishop of Winchester after the death of William Giffard (who was also Lord Chancellor to King Henry I) in England.

## Births

- Abu al-Abbas as-Sabti, Moroccan Sufi writer (d. 1204)
- Date Tomomune, Japanese nobleman and samurai (d. 1199)
- Elisabeth of Schönau, German Benedictine abbess (d. 1164)
- Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony and Bavaria (d. 1195)
- Theophanes Kerameus, bishop of Rossano (d. 1152)

## Deaths

- January 23 – William Giffard, bishop of Winchester
- January 27 – Ranulf le Meschin, 3rd Earl of Chester (b. 1070)
- January 29 – Minamoto no Shunrai, Japanese poet (b. 1055)
- February 16 – Thoros I, Armenian prince (or 1130)
- February 17 – Constantine II, Armenian prince
- July 24 – Shirakawa, emperor of Japan (b. 1053)
- July 28 – Zhao Fu, emperor of the Song dynasty (b. 1127)
- November 21 – Nigel d'Aubigny, Norman nobleman
- December 30 – Roger of Cannae, Italian bishop (b. 1060)
- Athanasius VI bar Khamoro, patriarch of Antioch
- Cellach of Armagh (or **Celsus**), Irish archbishop (b. 1080)
- Fujiwara no Akinaka, Japanese nobleman (b. 1059)
- John Theristus, Italian Benedictine monk (b. 1049)
- Ramiro Sánchez, Spanish nobleman (or 1130)
- Richard Fitz Pons, Norman nobleman (b. 1080)
- Walter FitzRoger, Norman sheriff of Gloucester
- Zhao Mingcheng, Chinese politician (b. 1081)
