---
title: "MediaKeySession - Web APIs"
source: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MediaKeySession
domain: encrypted-media
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: encrypted media extensions, content decryption module, digital rights management, media key session
fetched: 2026-07-02
---

# MediaKeySession

Baseline

Widely available

This feature is well established and works across many devices and browser versions. It’s been available across browsers since March 2019.

- Learn more
- See full compatibility

**Secure context:** This feature is available only in secure contexts (HTTPS), in some or all supporting browsers.

The **`MediaKeySession`** interface of the Encrypted Media Extensions API represents a context for message exchange with a content decryption module (CDM).

## Instance properties

**`MediaKeySession.closed` Read only**

Returns a `Promise` signaling when a `MediaKeySession` closes. This promise can only be fulfilled and is never rejected. Closing a session means that licenses and keys associated with it are no longer valid for decrypting media data.

**`MediaKeySession.expiration` Read only**

The time after which the keys in the current session can no longer be used to decrypt media data, or `NaN` if no such time exists. This value is determined by the CDM and measured in milliseconds since January 1, 1970, UTC. This value may change during a session lifetime, such as when an action triggers the start of a window.

**`MediaKeySession.keyStatuses` Read only**

Contains a reference to a read-only `MediaKeyStatusMap` of the current session's keys and their statuses.

**`MediaKeySession.sessionId` Read only**

Contains a unique string generated by the CDM for the current media object and its associated keys or licenses.

### Events

**`keystatuseschange`**

Fires when there has been a change in the keys in a session or their statuses.

**`message`**

Fires when the content decryption module has generated a message for the session.

## Instance methods

**`MediaKeySession.close()`**

Returns a `Promise` after notifying the current media session is no longer needed and that the CDM should release any resources associated with this object and close it.

**`MediaKeySession.generateRequest()`**

Returns a `Promise` after generating a license request based on initialization data.

**`MediaKeySession.load()`**

Returns a `Promise` that resolves to a boolean value after loading data for a specified session object.

**`MediaKeySession.remove()`**

Returns a `Promise` after removing any session data associated with the current object.

**`MediaKeySession.update()`**

Returns a `Promise` after loading messages and licenses to the CDM.

## Examples

```js
// TBD
```

## Specifications

| Specification |
|---|
| Encrypted Media Extensions # mediakeysession-interface |

## Browser compatibility
