---
title: "Johor (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johor
domain: ayam-kampong
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: ayam kampong
fetched: 2026-07-08
part: 2/2
---

## Utilities

The Johor Department of Economy Planning is responsible for all public infrastructure planning and development in the state, while the Landscape Department is responsible for the state's landscape development. Since the Ninth Malaysia Plan, the Johor Southern Corridor has been a focus for development. In 2010, the total state land used for commercial buildings was 21.53 km2 (8.31 sq mi), with Johor Bahru District accounting for 12.99 km2 (5.02 sq mi) or 63.5%. Since 2012, around RM2.63 billion has been allocated by the federal and state governments for 33 infrastructure projects in Pengerang in southeastern Johor. The 2015 state budget included spending more than RM500 million for development in the following year – the highest amount ever allocated. The state government also ensured that infrastructure and development projects would be fairly distributed to all districts in the state, with six focus areas outlined in the state government's strategic development plan in 2018. In the same year, the federal government allocated RM250 million for three infrastructure projects to improve connectivity and accessibility within the state capital. Following the recent change in the state government administration, the new government also pledged to provide better infrastructure for investors by improving the road network, providing an adequate water supply for factories and building sub-stations for electricity generation while rejecting foreign companies after discovering a foreign investor who claimed to use green technology to hide that he intended to use Johor as a waste disposal site.

### Energy and water resources

Electricity distribution in the state is managed by Tenaga Nasional Berhad. Most electricity is generated by coal and gas-fired plants. The coal power plant had a capacity of 700 MW in 2007 and 3,100 MW in 2016, which originated from the Tanjung Bin Power Station in Pontian. Two gas-fired plants, Pasir Gudang Power Station with 210 MW and Sultan Iskandar Power Station with 269 MW, are located in Pasir Gudang. The Pasir Gudang Power Station was retired from the system in 2016. The state government has been planning to construct hydropower and combined cycle power plants since 2015 and 2018 respectively. A new combined cycle power plant was constructed on a greenfield site near the old decommissioned power plants in Pasir Gudang, named the Sultan Ibrahim Power Plant.

All water supply pipes in the state are managed by the Water Regulatory Bodies of Johor, with a total of 11 reservoirs: Congok, Gunung Ledang, Gunung Pulai 1, Gunung Pulai 2, Gunung Pulai 3, Juaseh, Layang Lower, Layang Upper, Lebam, Linggiu and Pontian Kechil. The state also supplies raw water to Singapore for RM0.03 for every 3.8 cubic metres (1,000 US gal) drawn from Johor rivers. In return, the Johor state government pays the Singaporean government 50 cents (RM0.50) for every 3.8 cubic metres of treated water from Singapore.

### Telecommunication and broadcasting

As of August 2022, Johor had the largest 5G internet coverage in Malaysia, Johor Bahru's internet speed is also the fastest in Malaysia and second in Southeast Asia, after Singapore. Telecommunications in Johor were originally administered by the Posts and Telecommunication Department and maintained by the British Cable & Wireless Communications, which was responsible for all telecommunication services in Malaya. During this time, a troposcatter system was installed on Mount Pulai in Johor and Mount Serapi in Sarawak to connect radio signals between British Malaya and British Borneo, the only such system for both territories to allow simultaneous transmission of radio programs to North Borneo and Sarawak. In 1968, following the foundation of the Federation of Malaysia, the telecommunication departments in Malaya and Borneo merged to form the Telecommunications Department Malaysia, which later became Telekom Malaysia (TM). Early in 1964, Ericsson –a Nordic telecommunication company– began operating in the country. Following the first AXE telephone exchange in Southeast Asia that went online in Pelangi in 1980, TM was provided with the first mobile telephone network, named ATUR, in 1984. Since then, the Malaysia's cellular network has expanded rapidly. From 2013 until 2017, the state mobile-cellular penetration rate has reached 100%, with 11.3% to 11.5% of the population using the internet.

In 2018, the state internet speed was 10 Mbps with the government urging the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission to develop high-speed Internet infrastructure to reach 100 Mbit/s to match the state's current rapid development. The Malaysian federal government operates one radio channel – Johor FM through its Department of Broadcasting, officially known as Radio Televisyen Malaysia. There is one independent radio station, Best FM, which launched in 1988. Television broadcasting in the state is divided into terrestrial and satellite television. There are two types of free-to-air television providers, MYTV Broadcasting (digital terrestrial) and Astro NJOI (satellite), while IPTV is accessed via Unifi TV through the UniFi fibre optic internet subscription.


## Transportation

### Roads

The state is linked to the other Malaysian states and federal territories on the western coast through the North–South Expressway and on the eastern coast through Malaysia Federal Route 3. Since British colonial times, there has been a road system linking Johor's capital in the southern Malay Peninsula to Kangar in the north and Kota Bharu on the east coast. The roads in Johor are classified into two categories; 2,369 kilometres (1,472 mi) are federal roads while 19,329 kilometres (12,010 mi) are state roads, as of 2016. Johor uses a dual carriageway with the left-hand traffic rule, and towns in the state provide public transportation services such as buses and taxis along with Grab services. The Sungai Johor Bridge is in Johor, which is the longest central span river-crossing bridge in Malaysia and connects Johor Bahru and Kota Tinggi District. There are various expressways in the state capital city, including Tebrau Highway, Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway, Pasir Gudang Highway, and others. In 2018, construction of the Iskandar Malaysia Bus Rapid Transit was announced to be completed before 2021.

The previous federal government had allocated RM29.43 billion as part of the Eleventh Malaysia Plan for infrastructure projects including upgrading roads and bridges. The state government also spends over RM600 million on road maintenance annually.

### Rail

Rail transport in the state is operated by Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM). The railway line is connected to all of the states in western Peninsular Malaysia. It is also connected to stations in Singapore and Thailand. The KTM ETS service was extended into Johor in 2025, beginning with Segamat railway station in March, towards Kluang railway station in August and Johor Bahru Sentral station in December.

With its full completion, travel time by rail between Kuala Lumpur Sentral station and Johor Bahru Sentral station was reduced to 3.5 hours. The upcoming Johor Bahru–Singapore Rapid Transit System (RTS Link) linking Johor Bahru to Woodlands, Singapore will be the first rapid transit system outside the Klang Valley.

### Air

The Senai International Airport is the largest and the only international airport in Johor, which acts as the main gateway to the state. The airport is located in Senai Town, Kulai District. In 2016, the Malaysian federal government approved a total of RM7 million in upgrades for the airport. Four airlines fly to Johor: AirAsia, Malaysia Airlines, Firefly and Batik Air Malaysia. Other minor airports including Kluang Airport, Mersing Airport, Segamat Airstrip and Batu Pahat Airstrip in Kluang District, Mersing District, Segamat District and Batu Pahat District, respectively.

### Water

Johor has four ports in Iskandar Puteri and Pasir Gudang, which operate under three different companies. The Port of Tanjung Pelepas in western Iskandar Malaysia is currently the 15th busiest port in the world, and the largest transshipment hub in Malaysia. Johor also has two other container ports, the Integrated Container Terminal in Tanjung Langsat and Johor Port in Pasir Gudang. The Tanjung Langsat Terminal serves as the state's regional oil and gas hub and supports offshore petroleum exploration and production, while Johor Port is the world's largest palm oil terminal. There are boat services to ports in Batam and Tanjung Pinang of the Bintan Islands in Indonesia and to port in Changi in Singapore.


## Healthcare

Health-related matters in Johor are administered by the Johor State Health Office (Malay: *Jabatan Kesihatan Negeri Johor*). The state has two major government hospitals, Sultanah Aminah Hospital and Sultan Ismail Hospital, nine government district hospitals Permai Hospital, Sultanah Fatimah Hospital, Sultanah Nora Ismail Hospital, Enche' Besar Hajjah Khalsom Hospital, Segamat Hospital, Pontian Hospital, Kota Tinggi Hospital, Mersing Hospital, and Tangkak Hospital, and Temenggung Seri Maharaja Tun Ibrahim Hospital, a women's and children's hospital and mental hospital. Other public health clinics, 1Malaysia clinics and rural clinics are scattered throughout the state with a number of private hospitals such as Penawar Hospital, Johor Specialist Hospital, Regency Specialist Hospital, Pantai Hospital Batu Pahat, Putra Specialist Hospital Batu Pahat, Puteri Specialist Hospital, KPJ Specialist Hospital Muar, Abdul Samad Specialist Hospital, Columbia Asia, Gleneagles Medini Hospital and KPJ Specialist Hospital Pasir Gudang. In 2009, the state's doctor–patient ratio was 3 per 1,000 population.


## Education

All primary and secondary schools are under the jurisdiction of the Johor State Education Department, under the guidance of the national Ministry of Education. The oldest school in Johor is the English College Johore Bahru (1914). As of 2013, Johor had a total of 240 government secondary schools, fifteen international schools (Austin Heights Private and International Schools, Crescendo-HELP International School, Crescendo International College, Excelsior International School, Paragon Private and International School, Seri Omega Private and International School, Sri Ara International Schools, StarClub Education, Sunway International School, Tenby Schools Setia Eco Gardens, UniWorld International School, and Raffles American School and three international campuses of British Marlborough College, R.E.A.L Schools and Utama Schools), and nine Chinese independent schools. Johor has a considerable number of Malay and indigenous students enrolled in Chinese schools. There is also an Indonesian school in the state capital mainly for the children of Indonesian migrants. There are two Japanese learning centres in Johor Bahru. The state government also emphasises pre-school education in the state with the establishment of several kindergartens such as Nuri Kindergarten and Childcare, Stellar Preschool and Tadika Kastil.

Johor has three public universities, the University of Technology Malaysia (UTM) in Skudai, Tun Hussein Onn University of Malaysia in Parit Raja, and Universiti Teknologi MARA Johor in Jementah and the state capital. As of 2024, UTM is the second highest ranked university in Malaysia, after University of Malaya, according to Webometrics Ranking of World Universities. EduHub Pagoh, the largest public higher education hub in Malaysia, is being constructed at Bandar Universiti Pagoh, a new planned education township in Muar. The state also houses a number of international university branches, including Newcastle University Medicine Malaysia, Netherlands Maritime Institute of Technology, University of Southampton Malaysia, University of Reading Malaysia, Monash University Malaysia Clinical School, and others.

There are several polytechnics including Ibrahim Sultan Polytechnic and Mersing Polytechnic; and two teaching colleges, IPG Kampus Temenggong Ibrahim in Johor Bahru and IPG Kampus Tun Hussien Onn in Batu Pahat. It has one non-profit community college, Southern University College in Skudai. There is also a proposal to establish the University of Johor that has been welcomed by the Sultan of Johor with the federal education ministry also willing to extend their co-operation.

To ensure the quality of education in the state, the state government introduced six long-term measures to upgrade the capability of local teachers. In 2018, it was reported that Johor was among several Malaysian states facing a teacher shortage, so the federal education ministry set up a special committee to study ways to tackle the problem.

The Johor State Library is the main public library in the state.


## Demography

### Ethnicity and immigration

| Year | Pop. | ±% |
|---|---|---|
| 1970 | 1,277,180 | — |
| 1980 | 1,580,423 | +23.7% |
| 1991 | 2,069,740 | +31.0% |
| 2000 | 2,584,997 | +24.9% |
| 2010 | 3,230,440 | +25.0% |
| 2020 | 4,009,670 | +24.1% |
|   |   |   |
| Source: |   |   |

The 2023 Malaysian census reported the population of Johor at 4,100,900, with a non-citizen population of 276,900, making it the second most populous state in Malaysia, after Selangor. Of the Malaysian residents, 2,464,640 (60.1%) are Bumiputera, 1,312,128 (32.8%) are Chinese, 246,054 (6.0%) are Indian. In 2010, the population was estimated to be around 3,348,243, with 1,972,115 (58.9%) Bumiputera, 1,292,421(38.6%) Chinese, 237,725 (7.1%) Indian. Despite the racial diversity of the population, most people in Johor identify themselves as "*Bangsa Johor*" (English: *Johor race*), which is also echoed by Johor's royal family to unite the population regardless of ancestry. Johor Bahru District, anchoring the state capital Johor Bahru, is currently the second most populous district in Malaysia with a population of 1.8 million, as of 2023.

| Ethnic |   | Percent |
|---|---|---|
| Bumiputera |   | 60.1% |
| Chinese |   | 32.8% |
| Indian |   | 6.6% |
| Non-Malaysian citizen |   | 6.0% |

As Malaysia is one of the least densely populated countries in Asia, the state is particularly sparsely populated, with most people concentrated in the coastal urban areas, since towns and urban centres have massively expanded through recent developments. From 1991 to 2000, the state experienced a 2.39% average annual population growth, with Johor Bahru District being the highest at 4.59% growth and Segamat District being the lowest at 0.07%. The total population increased by about 600,000 every decade following the increase of residential developments in the southern developmental region; if the pattern continues, Johor will have an estimated 5.6 million people in 2030, larger than the government projection of 4 million.

Johor is among the most popular destinations for expatriates in the region. Its strategic geographical position has contributed to the state's rapid development as Malaysia's transportation and industrial hub, creating jobs and attracting migrants from other states and overseas, especially from Singapore, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Myanmar, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. As of 2018, nearly two thirds of foreign workers in Malaysia were located in Johor, Kuala Lumpur and Selangor, according to World Bank. Due to its rapid development and diversified economy, Johor attracted the highest number of inter-state migrants among all Malaysian states, with an influx of over 11.9 thousand people in 2020, despite dropping in 2022.

### Religion

| Religion |   | Percent |
|---|---|---|
| Islam |   | 58.7% |
| Buddhism |   | 25.9% |
| Christianity |   | 8.2% |
| Hinduism |   | 6% |
| No religion/Unknown |   | 0.2% |
| Others |   | 0.3% |

Place of worship

in Johor. Clockwise from top right:

Johor Bahru Old Chinese Temple

,

Church of the Immaculate Conception

, Sri Mariamman Temple and the

Sultan Abu Bakar State Mosque

.

Islam became the state religion upon the adoption of the 1895 Johor Constitution, although other religions can be freely practised. According to the 2020 Malaysian census the religious affiliation of Johor's population was 58.7% Muslim, 25.9% Buddhist, 8.2% Christian, 6% Hindu, 0.1% followers of other religions or unknown affiliations, 0.2% Taoist or Chinese folk religion adherents, and 0.2% non-religious. The census indicated that 80.2% of the Chinese population in Johor identified as Buddhists, with significant minorities identifying as Christians (18.2%), Chinese folk religion adherents (1.6%) and Muslims (0.2%). The majority of the Indian population identified as Hindus (73.5%), with significant minorities identifying as Christians (6.1%), Muslims (9.2%) and Buddhists (2.8%). The non-Malay bumiputera community was predominantly Christians (68.3%), with significant minorities identifying as Muslims (21.6%) and Buddhists (15%). Among the majority population, all Malay bumiputera identified as Muslims.

### Languages

The majority of Johoreans are at least bilingual, with Malay as the official language in Johor. Other multilingual speakers may also be fluent in English, Chinese and Tamil languages.

Johorean Malay, also known as Johor-Riau Malay and originally spoken in Johor, Riau, Riau Islands, Malacca, Selangor and Singapore, has been adopted as the basis for both the Malaysian and Indonesian national languages. Due to Johor's location at the confluence of trade routes within Maritime Southeast Asia as well as its history as an influential empire, the dialect has spread as the region's *lingua franca* since the 15th century; hence the adoption of the dialect as the basis for the national languages of Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. Several related languages are also spoken in Johor such as Orang Seletar (spoken along the Straits of Johor and in northern Singapore), Orang Kanaq (spoken in small parts of southeastern Johor), Jakun (spoken mostly in inland parts of Johor), Temuan (spoken near the border with Pahang and Negeri Sembilan) and Orang Kuala (spoken along the northwest coast of Johor). Terengganu Malay, a distinct variant of Malay, is spoken in the district of Mersing near the border with Rompin, Pahang.

Different dialect groups of the Chinese language are spoken among the Chinese community in the state, including Hokkien, Teochew, Hakka, Cantonese, Hainanese, Foochow, and Henghua.

The Indian community predominantly speaks Tamil. There is also a significant number of Malayalee populations in parts of Segamat, Johor Bahru and Masai, who speak Malayalam as their mother tongue. Moreover, small number of other Indian language speakers such as the Bengali, Telugu, and Punjabi language speakers are also present. Many Malayalees and Telugus are often categorised as Tamils by the Tamils themselves, and by other groups, as they use the Tamil language as a *lingua franca* among other Indian communities as in other locations in Peninsular Malaysia.

In 2017, the Queen of Johor, as the royal patron of the Malaysian English Language Teaching Association, called for a more conducive environment for young Malaysians to master English since there has been a drastic decline in proficiency among the younger Malaysian generation.


## Culture

Johor's culture has been influenced by different ethnicities throughout history, especially by the Arabs, Bugis and Javanese people, with the state also becoming a mixture of different cultures among the Chinese, Indian, Malay and aboriginal people.

A strong Arab cultural influence is apparent in art performances like *zapin*, *masri* and *hamdolok* and in musical instruments like the *gambus*. The *zapin* dance was introduced in the 14th century by Arab Muslim missionaries from Hadhramaut, Yemen, and was originally performed only by male dancers, although female dancers are now common. The dance itself differs among five Johor regions, namely *zapin tenglu* and *zapin pulau* (Mersing), *zapin lenga* (Muar), *zapin pekajang* (Johor Bahru), *zapin koris* (Batu Pahat) and *zapin parit mustar* with *zapin seri bunian* (Pontian). Another Arab legacy is the use of Arabic names with *wadi* (valley) for areas populated by the Arab community in the state capital such as "*wadi hana*" and "*wadi hassan*".

Buginese and Javanese cultural influences are found in the *bosara* and *kuda kepang* dances introduced to Johor before the early 20th century by immigrants of respective communities. The influence of Javanese language on the local Malay dialect is also noticeable from particular vocabulary collected in recorded observations. Indian culture inspired the *ghazal*. These cultural activities are normally performed at Malay weddings and religious festivals. The aboriginal culture is also unique with a diversity of traditions still practised, such as the making of traditional weapons, medicines, handicrafts and souvenirs.

### Chingay parade

The Chinese community holds the Chingay parade annually by the Johor Bahru Old Chinese Temple, which unites the five Chinese ethnic groups in Johor, namely Cantonese, Hainanese, Hakka, Hoklo and Teochew. This co-operation among different Chinese cultures under a voluntary organisation became a symbol of harmony among the different Chinese people that deepens their sense of heritage to preserve their cultural traditions. The Johor Bahru Chinese Heritage Museum describes the history of Chinese migration into Johor from the 14th to 19th centuries during the Ming and Qing dynasties. The ruler of Johor encouraged the Chinese community to plant gambier and pepper in the interior. Many of these farmers switched to pineapple cultivation in the 20th century, making Johor one of Malaysia's top fruit producers.

### Cuisine

Cuisine in Johor has been influenced by Arab, Buginese, Javanese, Malay, Chinese and Indian cultures. Notable dishes include nasi lemak, asam pedas, Nasi Beringin, cathay laksa, cheese murtabak, Johor laksa, kway teow kia, mee bandung, mee rebus, Muar satay, pineapple pajeri, Pontian wonton noodle, san lou fried bee hoon, otak-otak, telur pindang, and other mixed Malay dishes. Popular desserts include burasak, kacang pool, lontong and snacks like banana cake, Kluang toasted buns and pisang goreng. International restaurants offering Western, Filipino, Indonesian, Japanese, Korean, Taiwanese, Thai and Vietnamese cuisines are found throughout the state, especially in Johor Bahru and Iskandar Puteri.

### Holidays and festivals

Johoreans observe a number of holidays and festivals throughout the year including Independence Day, Malaysia Day celebrations and the Sultan of Johor's Birthday.


## Sports

As Johor has been part of Malaya since 1957, its athletes represented Malaya and later Malaysia at the Summer Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and Southeast Asian Games. The Johor State Youth and Sports Department was established in 1957 to raise the standard of sports in the state. Johor hosted the Sukma Games in 1992. There are four sports complexes in the state, and the federal government also provides aid to improve sports facilities. In 2018, as part of a federal government plan to turn Muar into Johor's sports hub, around RM15 million has been allocated to build and upgrade sports facilities in the town.

Located in Iskandar Puteri, the Sultan Ibrahim Stadium is the main stadium of the football club Johor Darul Ta'zim (JDT). A dominant club in Malaysian club football since the 2010s, they have won the Malaysia Cup six times, the Malaysia FA Cup five times, the Malaysia Super League for twelve consecutive seasons between 2014 and 2026, and the AFC Cup in 2015. The state women's football team also won four titles in the Tun Sharifah Rodziah Cup in 1984, 1986, 1987 and 1989. Another notable stadium in the state is Pasir Gudang Corporation Stadium in Pasir Gudang. Johor also launched its own esports league, becoming the second Malaysian state to introduce the sport to the Sukma Games, with the Johor Sports Council agreeing to include it in the 2020 edition.
