---
title: "1840 Fiji expedition (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1840_Fiji_expedition
domain: american-revolutionary-war
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: american revolutionary war
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 2/2
---

## Aftermath

### Other stops of the Ex. Ex.

The Ex. Ex. left Fiji in August and set a course for more surveying and scientific work in Hawaii, before temporary splitting up the expedition to survey Hawaii and other islands in Polynesia such as modern day French Polynesia, the Cook Islands, and the Gilbert Islands. Later, the expedition surveyed the Columbia River. On the return trip the expedition traveled to Wake Island, and returned by way of the Philippines, Borneo, Singapore, Polynesia, and the Cape of Good Hope, reaching New York on June 10, 1842.

### Fate of Chief Veidovi

While on the surveying expedition for the Columbia river, Wilkes appeared to have loosened his enmity to Veidovi at one point. He began allowing him on the deck of the *Vincennes*. A few months later on July 4th 1841 Wilkes and his men landed on Vancouver Island and fired off two howitzers in celebration of the holiday. During this occasion Veidovi was allowed to walk on shore. The next year in June, 4th 1842 Veidovi died a few days after landing in New York (possibly from pulmonary tuberculosis), although the Washington Herald inaccurately asserted that Veidovi died from a lack of eating human meat. Soon after Veidovi's death surgeons at the Brooklyn Naval Hospital removed Veidovi's head, pickled it, and then after a time the flesh was removed, and the skull was thereafter labeled Specimen 292 and was featured in the Smithsonian Institution, and became one of the most popular exhibits.

### Prosecution

Soon after Wilkes' arrival in New York several court martials were organized for the entire Ex. Ex. expedition. Wilkes had made many enemies in both the Navy, and the government. He was almost universally despised by his men for many of the actions he took during the expedition. Other officers were charged with various crimes, but Wilkes was charged with 11, and his actions throughout the Ex. Ex. were criticized in the defense of the other officers.

For his actions during Fiji the Battle of Malolo, Wilkes was charged with illegally attacking the natives. Wilkes justified his actions by stating "But I felt then as I do now, that the punishment was sufficient and effectual, while it was accompanied, as far as it could be, with mercy. Some, no doubt, will look upon it as unnecessarily severe ; but if they duly considered the wanton murders that have been committed on the whites in this group of islands, merely to gratify the desire of plunder or the horrid appetite for cannibal repasts, they would scarcely think the punishment too severe." Additionally, Wilkes claimed that he called for restraint in the attacks on the Fijians, but the log books indicated that he ordered only the sparing of women and children. However, even the most ardent of Wilkes detractors supported Wilkes on this matter. Many of them indicated by their words and actions that they hated the natives for killing their friends and desired revenge. What's more, Wilkes was able to garner sympathy for the death of his nephew of which it was universally acknowledged that he loved dearly. Ultimately Wilkes was cleared of all charges including his Fiji charges. The exception was that Wilkes was found guilty of illegally flogging marines and sailors in Hawaii after they refused to work when their enlistments were up. As a consequence, Wilkes was given a public reprimand.

### Monument

In 1843, a 22-foot cenotaph obelisk was built in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge Massachusetts to remember the officers who had fallen in the Ex. Ex. More specifically, the monument memorialized the loss of life in two separate events of the Ex. Ex. This included the loss of the USS *Sea Gull* (1838) a schooner that was Captained by Midshipman James W. Reid with the help of Midshipman Frederick A. Bacon. The *Sea Gull* was awaiting resupply from the USS *Relief* (1836), after which she was due to rendezvous with the rest of the fleet at Valparaíso, Chile. She was last spotted off Cape Horn at Midnight on 28 April 1839. After a while when the *Sea Gull* never returned the Ex. Ex. assumed all souls were lost.

While one side of the obelisk commemorates the memory of the officers of the *Sea Gull*, another preserves the memory of Henry Wilkes and Joseph Underwood killed during the first day of the battle of Malolo. The Officers and Scientific Corps. of the expedition took up a collection for their fallen comrades by the end of the Ex. Ex. Wilkes and his family desired that this monument should be constructed at a cemetery in Brooklyn, New York for the benefit of Henry's mother and sister who lived near by. However, in part due to spite over Wilkes' treatment of them the officers had the monument built in Cambridge close to Underwood's widow.

Specifically the Obelisk reads: "To the memory of Lieutenant Joseph A. Underwood and Midshipman Wilkes Henry, U. S. N. To the memory of passed midshipmen Jas. W. E. Reid and Frederick A. Bacon, U. S. N. This cenotaph is erected by their associates, the officers and scientific corps of the U. Exploring Expedition. Lieutenant Underwood and Midshipman Henry fell by the hands of savages, while promoting the cause of science and philanthropy, at Malolo, one of the Fiji Group of Islands, July 24, 1840, passed midshipmen Reid and Bacon were lost at sea, off Cane Horn, May, 1839."

### Missionary work

The Methodist missionary Reverend David Cargill reported to Hudson that because of the arrest of Veidovi, the other chiefs of Rewa became terrified at the prospect of harming white people. And that this show of strength served to aid in both Western trade and missionary work.

### Rise of the Beachcombers

For his political, translation, and informative aid in the expedition Wilkes made David Whippey the temporary consul of the United States in Fiji. Later, a more formal consul named John B. Williams was made the consul. However, with Wilkes' recommendation Secretary of State John C. Calhoun appointed him to vice consul of Fiji. According to Dr. Nancy Shoemaker, she theorizes the combination of the Fijians newfound fear of retribution for attacks against Westerners following the attacks of the Ex. Ex.. combined with Whippey's new position of power provided a lasting impact on Fiji. In that vein of thought, Shoemaker points out that Whippey's new found power complemented his unofficial title as chief of the white men/beachcombers of Levuka and the Royal Messenger of Bau village. With this fusion of power came a desire for autonomy for both Whippey and the white beachcombers he represented.

Traditionally, the beachcombers were compelled to fight for whichever local chief had them under employment. However, when chief Cakobau of Bau called them up to aid in him waging war against Cakaudrove at Somosomo, the beachcombers refused. They claimed they wished to protect their property. Cakobau became incensed, and was even more so after he lost the war against Cakaudrove. However, Cakobau was left in a bind. He feared that directly punishing Whippey and his beachcombers might bring down the wrath of the United States or another western power. Instead his punishment of the beachcombers was indirect and subtle. He encouraged other tribes under his domain to steal the beachcombers polygamous wives. He later demanded greater tributes from them and sent arsonists to burn down their homes.

The situation became exasperated when in 1843, the beachcombers refused to participate in the Bau–Rewa war. This time Cakobau exiled the whites and their mixed-race children to Bua and near the village of Solevu that was destroyed by the Ex. Ex.. However, by 1849, Cakobau allowed the beachcombers to return to Levuka. Trade in Levuka had suffered since the exile. The beachcombers were all to often, the most reliable middlemen traders for Fijians and the trade ships that came through Fiji. To Cakobau's dismay upon the beachcombers return they began to dominate all foreign trade to the exclusion of Cakobau and the Fijian people as a whole. The beachcombers under Whippey began defending themselves against small skirmishes or arsons as advanced by Cakobau. At this point beachcombers like Whippey, and their mixed families, had begun to transcend from being middleman minorities to autonomous settlers. The beachcombers at Levuka and elsewhere gradually made moves to separate themselves from the Fijian populace and became a semi independent military and trading power. The British would later capitalize upon this development, when they took ownership of it in 1874 and made Levuka its first capital. However, according to Shoemaker, it was the Ex. Ex.'s precedent for protection and subsequent retaliation for harm against whites that began the beachcombers move towards autonomy and the later British take over of the islands.

### Legacy

The Ex. Ex. taken as a whole led to several lasting scientific revelations, explorative discoveries, and historical preservations that continue to endure to today. The Fiji expedition was no exception. The Fiji expeditions artifacts contributed to the earliest collections for the National Institute for the Promotion of Science, the precursor to what would become the Smithsonian Institution. In addition to the cannibalized skull and the skull of chief Veidovi, an assortment of Fijian weapons had been procured for future display at the institute. Wilkes names the Ringgold Isles after Lieutenant Cadwalader Ringgold. Numerous botanical samples were also obtained from Fiji and other lands the Ex. Ex. surveyed, and were placed in the United States Botanic Garden or the Smithsonian Gardens. Dried plant specimens comprised the core of what is now the **National Herbarium**, an herbarium curated by the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History.

The Fiji Expedition was also not without its merits, for its contributions to science. As mentioned previously, Horatio Hale documented 5,600 words in the Fiji language as well as other information of anthological and cultural importance. Through his studies he produced the book *Ethnography and Philology* (1846), which is said to have laid the foundations of the ethnography of Polynesia, including Fiji. He is often cited as the Father of Polynesian ethnology. Moreover, the scientists Charles Pickering, William Brackenridge, and William Rich, collectively brought over 50,000 specimens of 10,000 species. And of the 241 charts that were created during the Ex. Ex. there was included the first ever complete chart of Fiji.
