---
title: "AMC Concord (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AMC_Concord
domain: dodge-monaco
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: dodge monaco
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 2/2
---

## VAM models

The Mexican government-owned automaker Vehiculos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) manufactured several models in Mexico under license from AMC. The made-in-Mexico vehicles had to have at least 60% locally sourced parts. VAM cars came with different trim and interiors than the equivalent AMC-made models. They were marketed as the VAM American. In addition to rebadged Concords, VAM developed the unique VAM Lerma that was based on the Concord coupe and sedan with the addition of the AMC Spirit's hatchback and rear end design along with its unique quarter glass treatment.

All engines built by VAM were of AMC design with appropriate changes to deal with lower octane gasoline and the higher altitudes in Mexico. Additionally, VAM developed a 282 cu in (4.6 L) version of AMC's I6 engine. The I4 and V8 engines, as well as five-speed manual transmissions, were not available in VAM-built cars. The three-speed manual transmission continued as the standard in all base models through 1983, while the four-speed manual was limited to performance models. All high-trim versions included automatic transmissions. The hatchback models were unavailable in base or DL trim, nor were the Griffith-converted Sundancer models.

### 1978

The Concord-based VAM American started as the "second generation" of the economy and luxury line of intermediate VAM compacts following the first generation of 1975 through 1977 Hornet-based Americans. The 1978 base models were called "American Sedan" and "Camioneta American" by VAM. The standard 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine came with a single-barrel carburetor and three-speed manual transmission with a column-shift on the wagon and four-door models, or a floor-mounted shifter on the two-door versions. A three-speed automatic transmission was optional with a column-mounted shifter in all three body styles, and ordering it included power steering, bumper guards, and a heater at no extra cost in both the sedan versions. The base wagon included the heater. A high-trim upgrade for the wagon was included when the automatic transmission was ordered. The four-door sedan and wagon featured a front bench seat, while two-door sedans had individual low-back, non-reclining seats. Standard were non-power brakes with front disks and rear drums, front sway bar, manual steering, a 3.31:1 rear differential gear ratio, plain blacked-out dashboard, a 140 km/h (87 mph) dual marked speedometer, fixed three-point front seatbelts (retractable on the base wagon), inside hood release, front ashtray, lighter, locking glove box, AM radio with antenna, rear ashtrays, round dome light, two-speed wipers, electric washers, flat volcano hubcaps with exposed lug nuts, "American" fender emblems, "4.2" rear quarter emblems, manual driver's side rearview mirror, base steering wheel, and a roof rack (wagon only). Factory options included power brakes, power steering (with manual transmission), heavy-duty springs and shocks, wheel trim rings, a sports-style steering wheel, luxury steering wheel, passenger's side remote mirror, tinted windshield, parcel shelf (standard on wagon), a bright molding package (wheel arches, drip rails, rocker panels, front hood edge, hood ornament), bumper guards (with manual transmission), and heater (for manual sedans).

The top-of-the-line models were named "American GFS" (equivalent to the U.S. Concord DL two-door), "American ECD" (Concord DL four-door), and "Camioneta American Automática" (Concord DL wagon). All three featured automatic transmissions, power brakes, power steering, 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engines (the 258 was standard on ECD models) with new-for-the-year Motorcraft two-barrel carburetor and 8.0:1 compression ratio, 3.07:1 rear gear ratio, light group (ashtray, glove box, hood, under the dashboard, and trunk (except on wagons)), custom steering wheel, woodgrain trim on the dashboard, a parcel shelf, clock, retractable seat belts, luxury upholstery, tinted windshield, bright molding package, "4.6" emblems ("4.2" on ECD), full wheel covers, and bumper guards. The GFS model included a floor-shift transmission and reclining individual high-back seats, while the ECD and automatic wagon had a column-mounted shifter and a front bench seat. Both sedan models incorporated vinyl roofs either in full- (ECD) or Landau-type (GFS). In contrast with AMC's U.S. versions was the two-door GFS because it included flip-open rear quarter windows along with the Targa-style band used in the 1977 AMC Hornet AMX models (the same design as on the Hornet-based 1977 VAM American GFS). The optional equipment list on VAM Americans included an air conditioning system with heavy-duty cooling (seven-blade flexible fan, three-line radiator, fan shroud, coolant recovery tank, and a 55-amp alternator), reading dome lights, remote-controlled driver's side mirror, passenger's side remote mirror, and rear window defroster.

### 1979

For the 1979 model year, all versions of the VAM American included redesigned aluminum bumpers with plastic side end caps, quad headlights over a transparent parking light, and a "waterflow" plastic grille. The station wagon with automatic transmission obtained a new designation, the "Camioneta American DL". The American GFS was similar to its AMC counterpart by dropping the targa-style band but continuing the Landau half-vinyl top. The side opera windows were changed to fixed glass with a VAM-designed sandblasted GFS emblem. The base and high-trim versions shared resigned door panels with the top-trimmed versions gaining a carpeted lower insert and map pouches. This was the first time trim and upholstery differentiated between the models. All cars with column-mounted shifters and automatic transmissions had a new gear indicator integrated into the speedometer. This replaced the indicators mounted on the steering column. A quartz digital version replaced the mechanical flip-style clock. The list of optional equipment was expanded to include a monaural AM/FM radio on the ECD and DL wagon (standard on the GFS). No full-wheel covers were offered; thus, the top models incorporated bright, narrow volcano-style hubcaps with a VAM logo as well as wheel trim rings. The custom steering wheel featured a new design with a soft rectangular button and a small metal VAM emblem.

#### American 06/S

A unique high-performance version of the two-door sedan the "American 06/S" was featured for 1979. It included the VAM-modified 282 cu in (4.6 L) engine, codenamed 4.6/X. The net rating was 172 hp (128 kW; 174 PS) at 4200 rpm and 225 lb⋅ft (305.1 N⋅m) of torque at 2600 rpm. It featured a 302-degree duration degree camshaft (compared to 266° stock camshaft), 8.5:0 compression ratio (8.0:1 stock), a Holley 2300 two-barrel carburetor (Motorcraft 2150 stock 282 carburetor), semi-ported engine head, headers with dual final outlets and exhausts, Prestolite electronic distributor with modified advance curves for higher acceleration, reinforced rebalanced crankshaft and a clutch fan (seven-bladed flexible stock heavy-duty cooling fan). This engine was the evolution of VAM's earlier "Go Pack" 282 engine from the early 1970s. This engine was commercialized because of an exemption in emission certification of up to 500 engine units per year, allowing the automarkers the creation of special models.

The 06/S model came standard with power brakes with front disks, power steering, front sway bar, heavy-duty suspension (stiffer springs and shocks), Tremec 170-F four-speed manual transmission with Hurst linkage, Spicer 44 rear differential with a 3.31:1 gear ratio, heavy-duty cooling (coolant recovery tank, fan shroud, and three-line radiator), leather-wrapped three-spoke sports steering wheel, reclining high-back bucket seats, dynamic three-point front seat belts, a center console with armrest and Rallye gauges (clock, vacuum meter, ammeter, and oil pressure) with an ashtray for the rear seat occupants, digital tachometer, woodgrain overlays on the dashboard, parcel shelf, full light group (except dome), an AM radio with a passenger-side rear quarter panel-mounted antenna, dual remote-controlled body-colored mirrors, tinted windshield, blacked-out bumpers, VAM-designed sports steel grille, eight-spoke 14×6 steel wheels with blacked-out volcano center caps, and D70×14 radial tires. The "Hornet in Flames" decal design by AMC found on the 1977 and 1978 AMXs was used on the hood and trunk lid of the 06/S as well as large white "06/S" decals on each quarter panel. The front and rear side panels were the same as the base model American two-door models rather than the high-trim upholstery with bottom carpet inserts and map pouches of GFS and Rally AMX models. Factory options for the O6/S included a sunroof, rear defroster, reading dome light, and an AM/FM radio. Because of the performance focus and engine specifications, automatic transmission and air conditioning were not available. A total of 499 units were produced, making it the most collectible Concord-based model for Mexico and practically the closest local equivalent of the 1971 Hornet SC/360 model. The 06/S was a one-year model as its replacement was the Spirit liftback "Rally GT" starting in 1980.

### 1980

The 1980 VAM Americans incorporated the changes designed by AMC for the U.S. Concords. Included were the full-width tail lights, rectangular opera windows on the two-door GFS (continuing the sandblasted "GFS" emblem of the previous year), the added four-door C-pillar windows on the ECD (with sandblasted emblems), and optional simulated wood bodyside trim for the American DL wagon for the first time. All versions came with a VAM-designed grille made of aluminum. This was the first time a front-end design differed from the equivalent AMC version. The high-trim models included argent polyurethane design full-wheel covers with the AMC logo on the center cap replaced by a VAM logo. This was VAM's first use of non-metal wheel covers. The three top-end models came standard with dual rearview mirrors with remote controls, and the shell-like semioval design in body color, which were optional equipment in the previous years. The American ECD now included the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 as standard (with the rear quarter panel emblem changes to the "4.6"). All high-trim VAM Americans were powered by the largest I6 engine. Equipment that became standard for the year included a flexible seven-blade fan and three-line radiator for all engines, essentially half of the heavy-duty cooling package.

All models featured as standard equipment a locking gas cap, a new 180 kilometres per hour (110 mph) speedometer, and front seat adjustable headrests regardless of trim level. The high-end VAM models expanded the options list to include intermittent wipers, power door locks, power windows, power trunk release (ECD and GFS only), electric antenna, and an AM/FM stereo radio (instead of the previous year's monaural units). A lighted vanity mirror and safety reflectors fixed onto the front door armrests were now standard equipment for the three top-end models. Door and side panels now included a curved plastic portion on their top part to cover the body-colored metal under the side rear windows and door glass that was previously covered by glued texturized vinyl that was color-keyed to the interior in the 1978 and 1979 models. Improved and luxurious B-pillar and headliner side moldings also debuted on the high-trim units. The American GFS switched to column-shifted transmission control, retaining the individual reclining seat configuration. The three base models now included a heater as well as high back front seats. The base models' interior side and door panels continued the previous year's design. The base American wagon now had power steering as standard. The custom steering wheel became standard in all six models, the only difference between the ones used in the high-trim models and the base ones being the metal rectangular woodgrain molding surrounding the padded horn button.

### 1981

The VAM American for 1981 in high trim obtained improvements as a luxury vehicle. All body styles included as standard equipment a rear defroster, reading dome lights, intermittent wipers, dual remote-controlled mirrors (new-for-the-year AMC squared chromed design), and AM/FM stereo radio. The options list now added a tilt steering column and power seats. The previous year's side panels with texturized vinyl tops were replaced by new high-trim fabric units keeping the carpet inserts but no longer having the map pouches. All cars, regardless of trim level, had the AMC-designed Spirit grille for 1981. Included were a fan shroud and coolant recovery tank, thus making all cars have the heavy-duty cooling system. Appearance changes included "Noryl" wheel covers replacing the Argent design for the high-trim versions.

The base models were upgraded, and ordering any of the three body styles with the automatic transmission now included: a quartz digital clock, retractable seat belts, tinted windshield, parcel shelf, full light group (courtesy, ashtray, glove box, hood, trunk lid) except reading dome light, woodgrain trim on the dashboard, wheel trim rings, full bright molding package (front hood edge, rocker panels, wheel lips, drip rails) except the central hood unit with the VAM ornament, and protective rubber side moldings. These were in addition to the already standard power steering and bumper guards. This positioned a mid-range model between the base and the GFS/ECD/DL versions. The automatic base wagon was not a DL. In 1981 and 1982, there were four versions of the station wagon model: base manual, base automatic, basic DL, and equipped DL. Despite this change, no special designation or distinction for the new better-equipped base models. VAM's marketing focused on having buyers request dealer-installed accessories. At the time, buyers typically took cars as they were at the dealership without upgrading them. This strategy also meant a more efficient protocol for VAM's production department, saving time and effort in assembling individual cars based on individual customer-ordered options. The practice of packaging options was not limited to the base models. The three high-trim Americans were also offered an optional package of all-power equipment, a tilt steering column, and an air conditioning system. Engine displacement emblems in both base and high-trim models were removed from the rear quarter panels. Similarly to the three high-trim models the year before, the three base models also obtained full-size door panels covering the top portion of their doors with an exclusive design. Despite this, the rear sides (two-door) and the portions behind the rear doors (four-door and wagon) remained the same as the years before, with exposed metal parts painted body color.

#### Lerma

The VAM Lerma model was introduced for 1981. This was an adaptation combining the central and front portions of the VAM American sedan with the rear third of the smaller Rally coupe creating a line of three- and five-door hatchbacks in a European style. It was intended to be VAM's most luxurious model and new flagship product of the company, the first since the 1976 VAM Classic DPL (equivalent to the AMC Matador sedan in the U.S. and Canada).

### 1982

Mexico's 1982 recession and currency devaluation weakened the economy and negatively affected the domestic automotive market. The dire situation, coupled with a government decree banning the importation of automotive accessories deemed "luxurious and non-vital to the vehicle" took its toll on standard and optional equipment for all cars sold in Mexico. Mexican automakers needed to source or produce these locally or replace them with a close equivalent. Because some had no domestic alternatives, the features were discontinued. The high-trimmed VAM Americans for 1982 were no longer available with power door locks, power windows, power trunk release, power seats, tilt steering column, quartz digital clock, rear defroster, wheel covers, and AMC's rectangular chromed remote mirrors. Items that were standard for 1981 such as the remote controls for the door mirrors, the intermittent wipers, the reading dome light, and the vanity mirror were put on the options list as either individual accessories or all of them (except mirror controls) being included as part of an air conditioning package. VAM continued the strategy of consolidating options. The remaining features were unchanged except for the new factory option of an AM/FM/stereo tape player system. Due to the loss of the chromed squared design, high-trim Americans reverted to the body-colored shell-type mirrors used in the 1980 models, while the base models continued to showcase the existing oval chromed versions used in most VAM cars since 1970.

All three high-trim editions featured a new VAM-designed grille with a rectangular pattern, while the three base models used AMC's square-pattern design borrowed from U.S. market Eagle models, marking for the first time a different grille design for each trim level. The GFS, ECD, and DL models had VAM-designed bumper end caps with a horizontal chrome molding on the top side edge. The ones for the front bumper were the same size as the originals, while those for the rear bumper were longer than their AMC counterparts, thus filling the gap between the body and bumper. AMC's Eagle black nerfing strip design was also applied to the bumpers. The headlight bezels changed to blacked-out units in their internal sections keeping the chromed surrounding areas. All-new aluminum road wheels with narrow chromed volcano center caps also replaced the previously imported Noryl wheel covers.

A unique version of the year was the American ECD, which featured a lengthened and squared rear roofline with smaller and more rectangular C-pillar windows that had a smaller "ECD" sand-blasted logo at the bottom instead of at the center like the two years before. Other changes included black quarter window surrounds for the American DL wagon that was used on AMC's Eagle wagons. The American GFS had plain side window panels. All six versions featured a new taillight finish with the previously silver-painted stripes and surrounds were changed into blackout form. The transparent front-end parking lights used since 1979 were replaced by new amber lenses. Both versions of the three base models were the same as in 1981 except for the grille design, new door panels, new seat patterns, and the absence of the quartz clock in the automatic cars. Early in the year, a new head design was introduced for the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engine with smaller spark plug openings and improved intake ports while still retaining the metal valve cover. The compression ratio was increased from 8.0:1 to 8.5:1 for both engines. The automatic transmissions obtained wider gear ratios.

### 1983

Following the nation's economic turmoil of 1982, Renault de México took over VAM from the Mexican government in February 1983. As with AMC, Renault was most interested in the Jeep line, VAM's production facilities, and its established dealer network. As soon as the agreement was finalized, Renault ordered the termination of VAM's passenger car line so it would not compete with its products. VAM's 1983 models were assembled to use up existing inventories, fulfilling previous agreements with suppliers, and fulfilling customer orders. The American line for 1983 included the two-door sedan, a body style that was discontinued by AMC in 1982.

The 1983 models received a new grille and headlight bezel designs. The external lines of both sets of parts changed from being vertical to diagonal from top to bottom until reaching the top back edge of the front bumper, creating a more aerodynamic look and practically covering up the gap between the bumper and the rest of the front end. Headlights and parking lights were the same units used in last year's models; the grille was characterized by a design of six horizontal rectangles consisting of two sets of three rectangles placed one in the left half of the grille and the other on the right half. Unlike the previous year, both the base and luxury models shared the same grille design as in the 1978 through 1981 models. Also new was a locally sourced reproduction of the luxury squared chromed mirror, now having the VAM logo near the mirror base where AMC's was originally. This design was to again have remote-controlled mirrors with a luxury appearance in its top-end models, but the manual-adjusted versions became standard for all 1983 VAM cars.

Both sedan models were available as the base manual transmission and semi-equipped automatic transmission versions. The cars now included more standard features including power brakes, power steering, and dual remote mirrors (without remote control). Cars with manual transmissions had a parcel shelf with two courtesy lights and a set of eight-spoke sports steel wheels with blacked-out volcano center caps as standard. Cars with automatic transmission included cost aluminum road wheels with chromed volcano hubcaps, the same high-trim upholstery door panels and seat designs as the previous GFS and ECD models along with door armrest safety reflectors and dual rear ashtrays (single central ashtray on the rear of the front seat back on the four-door), high-trim front hood edge molding and a central over-the-hood bright molding with a VAM ornament at the front edge. The two-door automatic models also had a reclining mechanism for their front seats while both automatic sedans' rear seat had a fold-down center armrest concealed at the seat back. The interior of 1983 VAM Americans base sedans with automatic transmission was close to that of the previous year's GFS and ECD models.

The American DL station wagon model was the only high-trim American model to be available. For 1983, the base automatic and the basic DL were merged into a single version alongside the equipped DL and the base manual, creating three versions for the year unlike the four of the last two years. The mid-range version had the same equipment as the four-door sedan models with automatic transmission of the year including the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine, it was also called "American DL" and carried the same exterior woodgrain trim and moldings that were not available in the base automatics of the previous two years. The differences between the mid-range DL and the top-of-the-line DL are the presence of the AM/FM stereo radio with four speakers, reading dome light, lighted vanity mirror, intermittent wipers, air conditioning, and the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engine in the latter model. The base model and mid-range DL included the 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine, an AM monoaural radio, two-speed wipers, no vanity mirror, and only a round dome light. The visual distinction between a mid-range DL from a top-of-the-line DL was limited to the bumpers; featuring VAM's in-house luxurious cap designs and nerfing strips that were introduced in the 1982 top models on the higher-equipped wagon while the mid-range featured regular chrome bumpers without nerfing strips and the original AMC bumper cap design. Only the top-of-the-line DL with air conditioning included the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 while the remaining two wagons had the 258 cu in (4.2 L), which in this year featured a partial head redesign with smaller spark plug outlets and improved intake ports following the engineering upgrades of the 1982 282 head. However, the valve cover design was now plastic as used by AMC on the 258 while the 282 continued to use the metal unit this year. Both automatic sedans equipped with air conditioning included the 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engine and five additional accessories of the top-of-the-line DL wagon. The only factory optional accessories available that were always separated from edition equipment were the AM/FM stereo tape player radio, remote-controlled door mirrors, and electric antenna. Leftover 1983 VAM Americans were sold as 1984 models.

### American Rally AMX

In 1978 and 1979, VAM offered a regular production performance model within the American line aside from the economy-based models and luxury GFS/ECD/DL units. This was the American Rally AMX, a successor to VAM's 1975 through 1977 American Rally and the Mexican equivalent of the 1978 AMC Concord AMX. In both years, the model served as the VAM's top-of-the-line sports product of the company, except for the limited edition 1979 American 06/S.

#### 1978

In its first year, the American Rally AMX was cosmetically almost the same as its U.S. counterpart. Both versions shared the same rear louvers, fender extensions, front air dam, side stripe, body-colored bumpers with guards and nerfing strips, shell-type door mirrors, roof Targa band, and mesh-grating grille design with round parking lights and central AMX emblem. The only different characteristics of the Mexican vehicle were the in-house five-spoke wheels with chromed volcano hubcaps and trim rings, the presence of original "Rally AMX" decals just under the regular side stripes (replacing AMC's lower body "AMX" design for the model), the "Rally" and "4.6" emblems, and the lack of the "Hornet in Flames" hood decal. Another visual difference took place in the midyear as VAM's customers did not like the mesh grille design as "simplistic and rough-looking". VAM changed the design incorporating rectangular parking lights placed vertically and between them, a set of three vertical lines (left, center, right), and a central horizontal line passing through them, behind this was a mesh grating half smaller in size as the original.

In the interior, both cars were far more different. The VAM car had woodgrain overlays over the front dashboard surfaces instead of brushed aluminum, a digital tachometer, a Hurst T-shaped shifter, a VAM logo over the horn button, a "Rally" emblem over the glove box door, reclining front bucket seats with a round border pattern on the fabric as well as on the side and door panels. In midyear, VAM replaced the round border pattern with a horizontal-line design in one or two tones due to criticism and rejection from customers. Mechanically, the model is restricted to only the 200 hp (149 kW; 203 PS) VAM 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engine with Tremec 170-F four-speed manual transmission with Hurst linkage or optional Chrysler Torque Flyte A998 three-speed automatic transmission with a 3.31:1 rear differential gear ratio with both transmissions. Factory equipment included power front disk and rear drum brakes, power steering, front sway bar, heavy-duty springs and shocks, a regular cooling system (rigid four-bladed fan and two-line radiator), as well as D70×14 radial tires.

#### 1979

The American Rally AMX was carried over for 1979 with substantial cosmetic changes that gave the model a higher level of originality within VAM and pushed it away from AMC's 1978 original. The body featured all-new side decal designs in two tones that were mostly straight and surrounded the side protective rubber moldings. The portion under the rear side windows grew thicker and housed an "AMX over Rally" decal using the same typography and design as the previous model, the legend "AMX" on top of the "Rally" one. All glass frames and moldings, volcano hubcaps, door mirrors, rocker panels, and bumpers were blacked out. AMC's dual-quad headlight design with transparent parking lights was adopted alongside an in-house VAM sporty grille design with four horizontal bars shared with the Gremlin X and American 06/S models of the same year. Both bumpers were changed to the new smaller aluminum units with side end caps, bumper guards, and nerfing strips. A unique feature of this model is the radio antenna placed on top of the passenger's side rear quarter panel, instead of the top of the right front fender.

The model was mechanically the same as the previous model, except the engine's output was measured using the net rating system, which made it now 132 hp (98 kW; 134 PS) at 4200 rpm. The interiors now included AMC's new center console design with a rear ashtray, armrest, as well as Rallye gauges along with AMC's shifter designs for both transmissions. The seat designs for the model were the same as in the second half of the year of the previous model year, while the door and side panels were redesigned with higher appointments of luxury including carpet inserts on the lower portion. The presence of the rear ashtray within the center console eliminated the need for dual-side ashtrays found in the 1978 models.

The American Rally AMX was discontinued at the end of the 1979 model year to make way for the new Spirit coupe-based Rally AMX for 1980. Unlike under AMC, it was the only version available for the Hornet/Concord hatchback body style in Mexico, meaning the base and DL models offered by AMC in 1978 and 1979 were not offered.

#### Rally Racing

The American Rally AMX participated in the competitions organized by the National Rallying Committee of Mexico (Comisión Nacional de Rallies) in 1978 with official support from VAM. The silver-painted car was piloted by Mexican driver and team member Jorge Serrano. He had a prototype version of the "4.6/X" high-performance 282 cu in (4.6 L) I6 engine that was later used in the American 06/S and Rally GT models. The cars became the national champion in the make and navigator departments, while Ford de México's team captured the driver's championship. For the 1979 Rally Mexico season, VAM's team switched to two Gremlin X cars.


## Racing

Tom Reffner, who won sixty-seven features driving an AMC Javelin during the 1975 season, campaigned his 1978 Concord AMX in races that included winning the April 8 ARTGO opener in 1979 at Wisconsin's Madison Capital Raceway with temperatures just above freezing. He also set the Wisconsin International Raceway track record with an average speed of 89.3 miles per hour (144 km/h) or 20.155 seconds for the lap during time trials, but placed second in the NKG 50 feature race, just two car lengths behind Dick Trickle. For the season, Reffner had 21 feature wins, and added 16 more in 1979 with the AMX, thus continuing an "outstanding" racing record in AMC cars from 1975 until a wreck at Elko in 1979.

An AMC Concord was entered in the 1978 World Challenge for Endurance Drivers. The car started the endurance race at the Six-Hours of Talladega Camel GT Challenge with 40 other cars, but was driven by Bo Montgomery for only one lap on 4 February 1978.

The same car was driven by Buzz Cason and Rick Knoop at the International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) Pepsi Six-Hour Champion Spark Plug Challenge at the Daytona International Speedway three days later and finished in 17th (out of 71 cars) with 130 laps.

On 9 March 1978, the Concord driven by Buzz Cason and Richard Valentine placed 27th (out of 70 entered) with 162 laps racing the Six-Hour Champion Spark Plug Challenge at Road Atlanta.

A 1979 AMC Concord was campaigned on the west coast from 1978 through 1981 by Buzz Dyer. Power was provided by a Traco Engineering-prepared AMC 366 cu in (6.0 L) V8 engine. It was initially in the Penske AMC Matador that won the 1973 season-opening event at Riverside driven by Mark Donohue. The Concord raced in six Trans Am events, as well as International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) events with a GTO entry and several IMSA AC races.

The car was in the following Kelly American Challenge races: the 1979 Road Atlanta and Mid-Ohio, the 1980 Golden State and in Portland, as well as the 1981 Sears Point and Portland events. On 24 June 1982, Buzz Dyer set a record 37-position improvement when he started in 48th place in his Concord and finished the Portland race in eleventh, a feat that stood in the SCCA NTB Trans-Am Series until the 1998 season. This Concord car was wun with other drivers in the SCCA GT-1 races through 1990.

Three or four drivers in the country raced the AMC Concord.


## Experimental engines

### Stirling

The Mexican-built VAM Lerma version of the AMC Concord served as the promotional and test vehicle for the Stirling engine. For the study, a 1980 four-door Lerma sedan was fitted with a P-40 engine and used to inform the public about the Stirling engine. AM General subsidiary of AMC was the major subcontractor for engine and vehicle integration for "The Automotive Stirling Engine Development Program" awarded to MIT by NASA with funding by DOE. One of the demonstration vehicles was the Concord-based Lerma. Additionally, a 1979 AMC Spirit engineering test vehicle was also tested extensively to develop and demonstrate practical alternatives to the traditional engines. The tests revealed that the type of engine "could be developed into an automotive power train for passenger vehicles and that it could produce favorable results."

### Gas turbine

A 1980 AMC Concord was the test vehicle in the conceptual design study of the automotive-based Improved Gas Turbine (IGT) powertrain. Working under a NASA contract for U.S. DOE's Division of Automotive Technology Development, Williams Research performed the design and analysis of the gas turbine engine. AMC's AM General subsidiary supplied the vehicle, transmission, and drivetrain, along with the typical car convenience accessories as well as completed the engine installation studies. The two-door sedan used a dual-rotor gas turbine with variable power turbine nozzle and a three-speed automatic transmission for the conventional rear-wheel-drive. Williams Research conducted all the performance and fuel economy analyses, with the turbine-powered Concord meeting expectations. The final report estimated that the IGT vehicle would have a 10% higher cost over the conventional piston engine, of which less than half of the cost penalty would be in the turbine engine. The remainder would be the cost of adapting the existing production of vehicles and systems. However, fuel economy improvements, as well as reduced maintenance and repairs, would result in an overall life-cycle cost saving of 9% for the IGT vehicle.


## Solargen Electric

### Development

Solargen Electric Motor Car Company produced battery-powered plug-in Solargen Electric Motor Car Company produced component AMC Concords during 1979 and 1980. The idea was developed by Steven J. Romer, a lawyer from Manhattan, who secured a United States Department of Energy (DOE) grant to build electric cars in 1979. The company also received incentives and vacant buildings from the city of Cortland, New York. Romer's previous negotiations included a promised restart of heavy-duty diesel truck production in 1977, along with a line of Subaru-bodied electric cars, using the original Brockway Motor Company facilities in Cortland.

Solargen planned to purchase Concord station wagon gliders from AMC and install batteries and direct current electric motors. The cars were to use more robust and resilient rechargeable lead crystal batteries that Romer bought from its inventors. The objective was for the **Solargen Electric** to be like a regular compact passenger automobile, instead of the unusual designs of the other electric vehicles on the market. It was to be able to travel 60–65 miles (97–105 km) without a charge and to reach up to 90 miles per hour (145 km/h). The Solargen Electric was to be priced at $9,500, could be completely recharged with an extension cord on regular 110 house current in about six hours, or in half that time with 220-volts, while the future installation of 440-volt coin-operated recharging units in filling stations along roadways was claimed to provide recharging in minutes.

### Production

Solargen began establishing dealerships, with thirty planned to be opened across the county by the end of October 1979. Problems were encountered with the advanced batteries, so the cars came with 20 regular lead-acid batteries underneath the hood and beneath the wagon's rear storage compartment. The Solargen provided a range of 30–32 miles (48–51 km) after a twelve-hour charge, and was not able to reach highway speeds. The battery cars were "remarkably silent,.. the only noticeable sound being an electrical 'whine' intentionally engineered into the design to warn pedestrians during acceleration of up to 18 mph." (29 km/h) The cars carried a price tag of about $17,000.

The Solargen's short production run of converted Concord station wagons was halted in late December 1979 due to delays in receiving a "major component", according to company officials. Subsequently, Solargen launched a $2.2 billion lawsuit against AMC claiming that the automaker conspired and reneged on a binding agreement to supply 3,000 Concords without a powertrain at $3,000 each and then not only raised the price to $4,593 per glider, but also delayed their delivery. The lawsuit also alleged that price increase and the delays were the results of pressure from General Motors "for the purpose of sabotaging Solargen's prospects of commercial success" and that AMC was in a conspiracy with GM in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.

### Legacy

Continuing the enterprise's unusual deals and history, Romer is believed to have gone to Sierra Leone in 1991, along with $25 million from forty different clients. Romer was later convicted of defrauding $7 million from investors, as well as being handed a 22-year prison sentence. Some of the Solargen cars have been converted to run with regular AMC engines (including the "personal demo car of the owner of Solargen") and only a few of the original electric-powered Concord wagons still exist while some are not operational when they are sold.


## Concords in film

The 1978 film, *The Betsy* is a story about a family-owned automobile manufacturer and their hopes for a return to profitability on a new model. Actual 1978 Concords can be seen being completed and painted on AMC's assembly line in Kenosha, Wisconsin.

American Motors was a sponsor of the TV show *Wonder Woman* in later seasons, and as a result, AMC cars such as Wonder Woman's 1978 Concord AMX were used by the main character and also given extensive "face time" on the series.


## Epilogue

The Concord was "AMC's last best shot at trying to stay in the market with an American-designed car" until it was discontinued after 1983. After building over 406,000 Concords, AMC dropped the line, and made its successor the smaller front-wheel-drive Renault Alliance, a car that alienated many AMC loyalists.

The Concord was built on AMC's "junior" platform, which also served as the basis for the four-wheel-drive AMC Eagle, which according to author Don Sherman "pioneered the crossover SUV", and according to author Marty Padgett "predated a whole generation of crossover vehicles". The AMC Eagle remained in production until it was discontinued after Chrysler purchased AMC in the middle of the 1988 model year.

For the 1987 model year, AMC introduced the imported Medallion to replace the discontinued Concord and the similarly sized, but poor-selling Renault 18-based 18i/Sportwagon, which had been sold at AMC dealerships from 1981 until 1986. The Medallion, like its 18i/Sportwagon predecessors, also failed to sell in large numbers, and Chrysler canceled the captive imports at the end of 1989.

For the 1993 model year, Chrysler introduced the LH platform series of full-size sedans that was based on and built in the same Brampton, Ontario factory as the AMC-developed and Renault-derived Eagle Premier. Significantly larger than the AMC Concord, the flagship of the LH line for several years was similarly named, the Chrysler Concorde.
