---
title: "AMC Ambassador (part 2/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AMC_Ambassador
domain: dodge-monaco
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: dodge monaco
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 2/3
---

## Sixth generation (1967–1968)

### 1967

American Motors introduced a completely restyled, longer, lower, and wider Ambassador for the 1967 model year, now riding on a 118 in (2,997 mm) wheelbase, or two inches (51 mm) longer than before. The Ambassador's platform was four inches (100 mm) longer than the new Rambler Rebel's 114-inch (2,896 mm) wheelbase. The Ambassador was positioned in the standard-size category, against traditional big cars such as Ford Galaxie, Chevrolet Impala, and Plymouth Fury. The convertible was offered again—this time in DPL trim—for 1967; but this would be the final year with 1,260 built. It featured an all-new "split stack" folding mechanism with concealed side rails that did not intrude into the backseat area, thus offering room for three adult passengers in the rear.

The car once again looked completely new, with a more rounded appearance that sported sweeping rooflines, "coke-bottle" fenders, greater glass area, and a recessed grille that bowed forward less than that of the 1965–66 models. Taillights were wider, rectangular, and divided by one central vertical bar. *Motor Trend* magazine described the all-new styling of the new Ambassador as "attractive" and "more graceful and easier on the eye in '67".

The 880 two-door sedans featured the identical roofline as the hardtops, but had slim B-pillars that gave them a more open-air "coupe" appearance and were marketed as "Sports Sedans". The 880 trim was also available in four-door sedan and station wagon versions, but more popular were the better equipped and more upscale 990 models came in four-door sedan, station wagon, and two-door hardtop body styles. Adding more elegance to DPL two-door hardtops and convertibles was the optional "Satin-Chrome" finish (paint code P-42) for the lower body side replacing the standard full-length stainless steel rocker moldings. A black or white vinyl cover was optional on 990 and DPL sedans and hardtops. The 990 **Cross Country** station wagons were available with 3M's "Di-noc" simulated wood-grain body side panels trimmed in a slim stainless steel frame.

The full-sized Ambassador featured a lengthy list of standard features and options. The interiors "rival more expensive cars for luxury and quality, yet are durable enough to take years of normal wear". The premium materials and fittings included wood-grain trim and even an optional "Custom" package with unique upholstery and two matching pillows. Ambassador DPL hardtops included reclining bucket seats with a center armrest between them (with a center cushion for a third occupant or a floor console with gear selector), as well as a foldaway center armrest for the rear seat. The new safety-oriented instrument panel grouped all gauges and controls in front of the driver, with the rest of the dashboard pushed forward and away from the passengers. Focusing on safety, there were now no protruding knobs, the steering column was designed to collapse under impact, and the steering wheel was smaller than previous Ambassadors.

The long-lived "GEN-1" family of AMC V8 engines was replaced by an all-new line of 290 and 343 cu in (4.8 and 5.6 L) engines that debuted for 1966 in the Rambler American. These V8s were an all-new design featuring a thin-wall-casting block, heads, and manifold. With a four-barrel carburetor and dual exhaust, the 343 cu in (5.6 L) produced 280 bhp (209 kW) at 4800 rpm and 365 lb⋅ft (495 N⋅m) of torque. A new four-link trailing-arm rear suspension system eliminated the old torque tube design, providing a more comfortable coil spring ride.

American Motors promoted the new 1967 Ambassador as an "uncompromising automobile with the red carpet ride" in print advertisements, as well as in an innovative TV commercial. However, sales of the redesigned models were disappointing due to customer confusion caused by the entire company's abrupt upmarket push, which seemed uncomfortably "me too" to the traditional domestic Big Three's customers. They also alienated American Motors' loyal buyer base. Abernethy's ideas for entering new markets were not working. These strategy changes led to a new round of financial problems for American Motors. Because of this, Abernathy was later that year released from AMC by its board of directors and replaced by William V. Luneberg and Roy D. Chapin Jr.

#### USPS sedans

American Motors provided specialized fleet options for commercial and municipal customers. Taxi and police versions were subjected to heavy use and the options were not available to the general public. A purchase order was made by the General Services Administration (GSA) of 3,745 Ambassador base 880 four-door sedans for use by the United States Postal Service (USPS), most to be built in factory right-hand-drive. There were six vehicles for review for this purchase and tested was a left-hand drive AMC Ambassador 880 sedan with its back seat removed.

Not all of the units ordered for the postal service had right-hand drive. Specifications included factory heavy-duty fleet options such as rubber floor mats, upholstery, and the deletion of the rear seat. Most came with the base 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 engine along with column-shift automatic transmission and "Twin-Grip" (limited-slip differential). All came with an identification metal plate on the dash near the ashtray.

American Motors took advantage of this large fleet order to market the 1967 Ambassadors. Print advertisements in popular magazines headlined "We Deliver" with a picture of the USPS vehicles, while other ads described that Ambassadors would provide safety, reliability, and a "red-carpet" ride.

The engineering to make the cars right-hand-drive served as the template for other American Motors vehicles based on the Ambassador platform, destined for foreign right-hand-drive markets such as Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. The Rambler Rebel and its replacement, the AMC Matador, were, after that, built using the same RHD dash, steering, and instrumentation as the 1967 USPS Ambassador sedans for both built-up export to the United Kingdom, as well as for the knock-down kits supplied for local assembly in Australia and New Zealand. The Matador was built in Australia until 1976 in this way.

#### AMC Marlin

The fastback Marlin two-door hardtop that was previously built on the Rambler Classic platform in 1965 and 1966, was continued for 1967, but was now based on the larger Ambassador platform. The total redesign of the related AMC intermediate and full-size platforms made it easy for the personal-luxury model shift to the Ambassador's longer 118 in (2,997 mm) wheelbase. It now featured the Ambassador's front end, longer hood, and luxury appointments with an even longer fastback roofline than the previous versions. The opinion of professional auto stylists is that the Ambassador-based design "produced the best result. In their view, the longer platform stretched out the profile and smoothed the lines."

### 1968

American Motors was a pioneer in air conditioning through its Kelvinator refrigerator division. AMC's marketing chief Bill McNealy wanted to make the Ambassador stand out in a crowded market segment and decided to add more significant distinction to the 1968 Ambassador line by making the All Weather A/C system as standard equipment. This was the first time any volume car manufacturer had done so, something that even Cadillac and Lincoln had not offered on their luxury cars – although some of them were priced at more than twice as much as Ambassador.

Most Ambassadors were ordered with air conditioning, so AMC garnered effective marketing distinction at little cost by including it with the 1968 model year. While all Ambassadors came with it as standard, consumers could order the car without air as a "delete option" and decrease the price by $218. As AMC pointed out in their advertising campaign for the Ambassador, the only other major automaker that offered air conditioning as standard equipment on its cars in 1968 was Rolls-Royce. Air conditioning was standard only on Cadillac limousines.

Because of slow sales during the 1967 model year, both the top trim convertible and the basic two-door models were dropped for 1968. The new Ambassador lineup consisted of a base two-door hardtop and a four-door sedan, a mid-level DPL in three body styles (two-door hardtop, four-door sedan, and station wagon), and a new top-of-the-line SST available as a two-door hardtop or a four-door sedan. The personal luxury fastback Marlin that was based on the Ambassador platform was also discontinued to make way for the smaller 1968 AMC Javelin in the pony car segment.

The top-of-the-line 1968 Ambassador SST version was "especially appealing" and "a very luxurious package" with standard V8 power, air conditioning, expensive upholstery, individual reclining front seats, wood-look interior trim, upgraded exterior trim, as well as numerous conveniences such as an electric clock and a headlights-on buzzer. The high-level of standard equipment had marketing brochures asking, “Could that SST stand for Sensational Straight Through?" while reviews described the 1968 Ambassador SST as "The Kenosha Cadillac".

Styling changes were minor. Taillights were now recessed in body-color bezels divided by a single central horizontal bar. Front headlight bezels were now made of nylon and similarly body-colored. A new injection-molded ABS thermoplastic polymer grille was dominated by a horizontal bar that extended forward in the center from the sides, while its outline had squared off edges that wrapped ahead into the inner headlight extensions. Fender-mounted marker lights were added at the front and rear as standard equipment, as the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations mandated their application (along with seat belts beginning January 1, 1968) to all passenger cars sold in the United States for 1968.

However, AMC's most enduring styling feature debuted on the Ambassador for 1968, as flush-mounted paddle-style door handles replaced the former push-button units on all American Motors cars, save the compact Rambler American. The heavy, chromed door handles with push-buttons on the 1967 models were the most protruding body side feature, making the cars 78.4 in (1,991 mm) wide. The 1968 versions have the same bodyside and door sheetmetal, but the AMC's new door handle design was set completely flat against the door skin, eliminating the snag hazard and reducing the car's width to 77.2 in (1,961 mm). The practical and "disarmingly simple design" predated safety-related mandates and industry norms. The interior locking was no longer by the traditional windowsill push-button, but a lever set into the armrest.

Front-wheel alignment was made more accessible and more accurate by moving the camber adjustment from the upper to the lower control arm on the double wishbone suspension, and the caster angle adjustments also moved from the upper control arm to the drag strut. At midyear, AMC's new top engine, the AMX 390 cu in (6.4 L) 315 hp (235 kW; 319 PS) V8, became an option in the Ambassador line, bringing the total engine options up to four.

In June 1967, American Motors started a new advertising campaign created by Mary Wells Lawrence of the Wells, Rich, and Greene marketing agency. The US$12 million AMC account was high-profile assignment and helped established the agency as innovative and daring in its approach. The new advertising violated the convention of not directly attacking the competition, and AMC's campaigns became highly controversial. The publicity worked with AMC's total retail sales improving 13% for the fiscal year, but 1968 Ambassador numbers were slightly down.

The market positioning meant that "the AMC Ambassador was a car with no real competitors throughout most of the sixties" because it was viewed as a luxury-type car and could be put against the higher-end large-sized models from the domestic Big Three automakers even though it was more of a midsized car in overall dimensions. This strategy allowed AMC to offer a perceived premium experience in a more manageable package, appealing to a segment of consumers seeking refinement without the bulk of traditional American luxury cars.


## Seventh generation (1969–1973)

### 1969

In 1969, the Ambassador received a major restyling, with a 4-inch (102 mm) gain in overall length and wheelbase. The 122-inch (3,099 mm) wheelbase was accompanied by an increase in front and rear track from 58.5 to 60 inches (1,486 to 1,524 mm). The front end appearance was revised with new quad headlight clusters mounted horizontally in a new molded plastic grille. The grille was blacked out, with a chrome horizontal bar connecting the headlight clusters. The hood was redesigned to accommodate the grille's raised center portion, and it faintly recalled Packard's classic grille/hood combination. Dick Teague, AMC's Vice President of Styling, had worked at the luxury car manufacturer before joining AMC. Parking lights were rectangular and mounted horizontally in recessed wells in the front bumper, just beneath each set of headlights. The entire front fascia leaned forward slightly to lend an air of forward motion to the car's appearance.

At the rear, ribbed rectangular taillights were mounted inboard the Ambassador's rearward-thrusting rear fenders. Square ribbed marker lights of similar height were mounted at the trailing edge of each fender side. The deck lid had a slightly higher lift-over for cargo access. The base and DPL models had no bright trim panel between the taillights, while the top-line SST versions featured a panel with a red finish to match the taillights. Station wagons saw vertical wraparound taillights replacing the previous "hooded" units, which were not visible from the side. The 1969 AMC Ambassador was a smooth, powerful, well-proportioned sedan that did not look like anything else on the road.

The interiors were upgraded, and a new deeply hooded dashboard clustered instruments and controls in front of the driver. There was an increased emphasis on luxury-type trim and features by buyers. The base model two-door hardtop Ambassador was no longer offered for the 1969 model year.

The 1969 Ambassador stressed luxury, with the marketing tagline developed by Mary Wells Lawrence at the Wells Rich Greene agency, tying the car's value, "It will remind you of the days when money really bought something." The combination of rich velour upholstery, individually adjustable reclining seats, standard air conditioning, and the longer wheelbase were highlighted in advertisements with Ambassador's posh"limousine" ride at an economical price. One aspect of this new advertising theme included many AMC dealers inviting prospective customers to call and request a "demonstration ride", in which a uniformed chauffeur would arrive at the prospect's home and drive them around in an Ambassador SST sedan. AMC's efforts worked, and Ambassador sales increased again.

#### Royale Stretch Limo

Not only did AMC promote the 1969 Ambassador as having a "limousine" ride and deluxe appointments, but Chicago auto leasing executive, Robert Estes, had the Armbruster/Stageway Company convert Ambassadors into real 24-foot (7.3 m) limousines riding on a 158-inch (4,013 mm) wheelbase. Known as the **Royale Stretch Limo**, one was owned by the State of Wisconsin as the official vehicle for Governor Warren Knowles. The conversions were unusual because they did not keep the stock rear doors—as is typical in most limos. The back doors were welded shut, and the Ambassadors were lengthened by inserting a section just behind the original B-pillar that had an entirely new central door in this center, making a large opening for entry and egress. Four-inch (100 mm) steel "I-beams" bridge the expanse created by the stretch. Power comes from the "AMX" 315 hp (235 kW; 319 PS) 390 cu in (6.4 L) V8 engine backed with the BorgWarner automatic transmission and a "Twin-Grip" limited-slip differential with 3.15 gears.

### 1970

The most significant change by AMC for the 1970 model year was the launch of the new compact Hornet that not only replaced the Rambler American, but also became the platform for several types of vehicles through its discontinuation in 1988. However, all car lines received changes and updates for 1970.

The 1970 AMC Ambassadors were announced on 1 October 1969, featuring new rear end styling for the two-door hardtops and four-door sedans while the station wagons gained a new roof panel to accommodate a longer 6-foot (1,829 mm) luggage rack, which was standard. The luxury-positioned Ambassador continued to offer air conditioning as standard equipment. Model designations continued with the "SST" and the "DPL" while the fleet-oriented "Basic" version was offered only as a four-door sedan. The "basic" model was not available for export markets.

The two-door hardtops and four-door sedans featured a new design that was shared by the intermediate 1970 AMC Rebel. Restyling on the two-door versions consisted of a sloping roofline into the rear deck and broad C-pillars highlighted by upswept reverse-angle quarter windows. The beltline kicked up at the point where the hardtop's rear windows swept upward and tapered back to the fender end, meeting a new loop-type rear bumper with integrated rear lamps.

On the four-door sedans, the roofline featured slimmer C-pillars and squared-off rear door windows, meeting a beltline that kicked up beneath the trailing edge of each rear door window. The beltline tapered back to the same rear fascia as on the two-door hardtops. The rear bumper on the hardtops and sedans contained a new ribbed taillight lens that stretched wall-to-wall and included twin square white reverse light lenses in its center.

The station wagon's rear end was mostly unchanged from the 1969 versions. It included the dual-swing tailgate that could open down to extend even with the load bed or open like a door on its hinges on the left side, facilitating egress for the optional rear-facing third-row seat for two passengers. A power lift tailgate window was included with the three-row station wagons.

All Ambassadors received a new extruded aluminum grille at the front, featuring several widely spaced slim bright horizontal bars with one larger, body-colored filled horizontal bar extending to each headlight cluster. The Ambassador was available in fourteen exterior colors, 31 two-tone combinations (including the bodyside and tailgate on DPL station wagons, while SST included wood-grained vinyl exterior trim), and a vinyl roof cover in black, white, or blue was optional for DPL and SST hardtops and sedans. Interior choices included seats with coil springs and upscale brocade upholstery or available channeled velour in SST sedans. Standard on the Basic and DPL models was a non-reclining full-width front bench seat for three passengers. The SST included 50-50 individual reclining front seats. The two-door hardtop SST was available with high-back bucket seats in fabric or vinyl. They came with an armrest and a center cushion with the standard column-shifted automatic or optional center console-mounted shifter.

The 290 cu in (4.8 L) V8 was replaced for 1970 by a new 304 cu in (5.0 L) V8 engine. This 210 hp (157 kW; 213 PS) at 4400 rpm and 305 pound force-feet (414 N⋅m) of torque at 2800 rpm was the standard engine on all DPL and SST models. The 343 cu in (5.6 L) V8 was also supplanted by a 360 cu in (5.9 L) engine in either two-barrel, regular gasoline, or high-output, four-barrel, premium fuel versions. The four-barrel "AMX" 390 cu in (6.4 L) V8 engine was optional, producing 325 hp (242 kW; 330 PS) at 3200 rpm and 420 pound force-feet (569 N⋅m) of torque at 3200 rpm. Only the base model positioned as a fleet vehicle had a 232 cu in (3.8 L) I6 engine as standard. The three-speed automatic transmission was standard on Ambassador DPL and SST models.

New for the 1970 model year were two stripe whitewalls. The images of the Ambassador in AMC's 1970 marketing materials featured the new design replacing the previous single whitewall option. However, the dual white stripe tire popularity did not last long. Factory audio options included vertically instrument panel-mounted AM or AM/FM radios, as well as an additional eight-track stereo tape player for sedans and hardtops.

Marketing for the 1970 AMC Ambassador focused on it being a rich-looking car that was highly affordable. The promotion noted the Ambassador is AMC's finest car, like the Cadillac at General Motors, Lincoln Continental is Ford's, and Imperial is Chrysler's, but "about the size of their Impalas, Galaxies, and Furys" that were considered ordinary models at the time. The Ambassador, built on a 122 in (3,099 mm) wheelbase was compared to the final generation of Lincoln's Town Car 123.7 in (3,142 mm) wheelbase as sharing dimensions. The Ambassador, "though exceptionally well appointed, was comparatively inexpensive, A '70 SST, for example, ... $3,739 [two-door hardtop] - far less than an equivalent car from GM, Ford, or Chrysler."

American Motors marketing agency used innovative techniques such as comparative and "off-beat" ads as well as the heavy use of TV spots to emphasize exciting cars and a youthful image. Not yet well known at the time, Robert De Niro was featured in television advertisements as an accountant who just finished college and purchased a luxurious car. Little Italy, Manhattan, is featured as the backdrop and there are caricatures of Italian Americans. The advertisement resembles the setting of *The Godfather*, but was made two years before that film and four years before De Niro joined that film series.

An estimated 58,900 AMC Ambassadors were produced for the 1970 model year with an average MSRP of $3,677.

### 1971

The 1971 AMC Ambassador line of cars received minor changes following its major redesign in 1970. The marketing for the year adopted a "David vs. Goliath" theme, with the tagline asking, "If you had to compete with GM, Ford, and Chrysler, what would you do?" Mary Wells Lawrence, founder of the Wells, Rich, Greene marketing agency, was known for unconventional approach, and their work helped establish AMC's image as the underdog challenging the dominance of the domestic "Big Three" automakers. The agency "started running sassy, combative ads" to differentiate AMC's cars. One answer to this challenge was by AMC including an extensive list of standard features, advantages, and benefits to stand out against its larger competitors.

For the 1971 model year, AMC streamlined the Ambassador lineup. The previously unnamed base model was dropped, with the sedan-only DPL trim line taking its place as the entry-level offering. A new top-of-the-line **Brougham** trim was introduced, positioned above the mid-range SST models. The SST and Brougham were available in two-door hardtop, four-door sedan, and station wagon body styles.

Part of AMC's value proposition was including premium features as standard. All Ambassadors came equipped with a BorgWarner "Shift-Command" automatic transmission, removing the manual transmission option from the lineup. The DPL model featured AMC's new 258 cu in (4.2 L) I6 engine, rated at 150 hp (112 kW; 152 PS) with a seven-main bearing design for improved durability. The SST and Brougham models included the 304 cu in (5.0 L) V8 engine, rated at 210 hp (157 kW), as standard equipment. Optional engines included 360 cu in (5.9 L) V8 in a 8.5:1 compression model with a two-barrel carburetor using regular gasoline or a high-compression, four-barrel version that required premium fuel. The top engine option was a powerful new 401 cu in (6.6 L), 335 hp (250 kW) V8 that replaced the previous "AMX" 390 cu in (6.4 L) version.

The 1971 Ambassador's styling changes were concentrated on the front and rear of the vehicle. The front end featured a new distinctively styled grille with a bright surround with rounded edges. The headlights were housed in chrome pods that flanked the recessed "natural" cast pot metal grille insert with a bright vertical bar pattern. A second set of parking lights was integrated into the fender extension, a design change that eliminated the need for separate front marker lights and gave the car a cleaner look. The taillights on the two-door hardtops and four-door sedans remained a full-width, "wall-to-wall" design. However, the twin backup lights were repositioned from the center of the taillight cluster to a more outboard location. The station wagon received a new design for its optional woodgrain side trim, which flowed in a downward arc from the front fender, a styling cue reminiscent of the "sweep spear" on the Buick Skylark. The dual-hinged station wagon tailgate was standard and for added safety, the woodgrain trim on it was made reflective.

The Ambassador's durability made it a popular choice for fleet buyers. The base DPL sedan was offered various heavy-duty packages for police departments, taxicab companies, and government agencies. They were equipped with the more powerful 360 cu in (5.9 L) or 401 cu in (6.6 L) V8 engines for police cruisers and support vehicles.

| 1971 AMC Ambassador production | "DPL" | "SST" | "Brougham" |
|---|---|---|---|
| Four-door sedan | 6,675 | 5,933 | 13,115 |
| Station wagon |   | 4,465 | 5,479 |
| Two-door hardtop |   | 1,428 | 4,579 |
| **Total = 41,674** |   |   |   |

### 1972

Minor changes were incorporated in 1972 Ambassadors, as AMC's most significant news for the year was the addition of the innovative **AMC Buyer Protection Plan**, which included the industry's first 12-month or 12,000-mile (19,000 km) bumper-to-bumper warranty. This was the first time an automaker promised to repair anything wrong with the car (except for tires) and owners were provided with a toll-free telephone number to the company, as well as a complimentary loaner car if a warranty repair took overnight. This backing also included mechanical upgrades to increase durability and quality, such as the standardization of electric windshield wipers on all model lines, replacing AMC's vacuum-powered units, and better interior trims.

The base Ambassador DPL model was canceled, with three body styles now available in SST and Brougham trim. Fleet purchasers could order plain Ambassadors in Police Pursuit Vehicle (PPV) or Special Service Package (SSP) versions. A six-cylinder engine was no longer available; thus, the Ambassador became an exclusively V8-engined car for the first time since 1964. This made the Ambassador the only volume-produced American car that included air conditioning, power brakes, automatic transmission, and a V8 engine as standard equipment; all while being priced less than the Big Three's full-sized cars. The base engine was the 304 cu in (5.0 L) with two 360 cu in (5.9 L) or a 401 cu in (6.6 L) versions optional. The engines were designed to operate on regular-grade, low-lead, or unleaded types of gasoline. All were based on the engine designs responsible for AMC winning the 1971–1972 Trans-Am Series. The BorgWarner transmission was replaced by the "Torque-Command" (TorqueFlite) three-speed automatic sourced from Chrysler.

Styling changes on the 1972 Ambassador were minimal and consisted of a new crosshatch cast metal grille with bright trim and new integrated fender extension mounted side marker lamps on the front. Brougham station wagons now included a roof rack, rear air deflector, as well as 3M "Di-noc" woodgrain trim on body sides and tailgate.

A *Popular Mechanics* magazine survey after driving a total of 1,000,000 miles (1,609,344 km) found Ambassador owners were pleased with their cars, describing them to be "very comfortable to drive and ride in" with handling listed as a top "specific like" by half of the drivers. A very high percentage (92%) would buy one again. Although the Buyer Protection Plan was listed by only 8.5% as a reason to buy an Ambassador, owners valued the smaller AMC dealers that "had more time to be courteous and to pay personal attention to customers".

By focusing on quality, the smallest domestic automaker was profitable in 1972, earning US$30.2 million (the highest net profit achieved by AMC since 1964) on $4 billion in sales.

### 1973

The SST models were dropped from the line, as all 1973 Ambassadors now came in one high-level "Brougham" trim. Ten popular items, including an AM radio, power disc brakes, tinted glass, and whitewall tires were added to the already extensive standard equipment list that included air conditioning, V8 engine, and automatic transmission. The Ambassador line "maintains its reputation as one of the industry's most completely equipped cars". Multiple improvements in quality were designed to reinforce the new "Extended Buyer Protection Plan" exclusive to AMC cars that provided complete maintenance coverage for two years or 24,000 miles (38,624 km). The automaker's marketing campaign shifted to stress quality in a "we back them better because we build them better" advertising with particular emphasis into the Hornet, Matador and Gremlin promotion, while the Ambassador received individual support with the tagline "you get standard equipment, the luxuries you'd normally have to pay extra for."

In range rationalization to a single trim available in two-door hardtop, four-door sedan, and station wagon body versions, the styling changes for the 1973 Ambassadors were minimal. Heftier front and rear bumpers were included to comply with new U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations that required all passenger cars to withstand a 5-mile-per-hour (8 km/h) front and a 2.5-mile-per-hour (4 km/h) rear impacts without damage to the engine, lights, and safety equipment. Ambassadors complied with the regulation by incorporating a stronger front bumper equipped with self-restoring telescoping shock absorbers. Designed to "give" as much as 3.5 in (89 mm), it jutted slightly forward from the front fascia and incorporated flexible trim matching the body paint. This bumper also featured a more prominent horizontal rubber guard at its upper portion near the grille, thus eliminating the need for a pair of vertical chrome bumper guards that were optional before. The grille gained heavier horizontal bars, and headlight bezels took on blackout trim in their recessed portions. The rear bumper gained vertical black rubber bumper guards, replacing a pair of similar and previously optional chrome bumper guards. The taillight panel on sedans and hardtops also got a blackout surround and now held four rectangular lenses each trimmed with a three-by-four grid overlay, the outer and inner lenses separated by the backup lamps and the two inner ones separated by the Ambassador eagle-and-shield emblem. Finally, the woodgrain paneling on station wagons was moved below the side moldings.

Model year production for AMC increased 25%, outperforming the industry average production increase by 75%, with only a slightly changed product in the showrooms.


## Eighth generation (1974)

### 1974

The 1974 model year AMC Ambassadors represented the eighth and final generation of AMC's flagship line, differing markedly in styling and interior finish from their 1970 through 1973 predecessors. This redesign occurred just as the 1973 oil crisis dramatically impacted the American automotive landscape, sparking nationwide gasoline rationing due to the oil embargo and a rapid shift in consumer preferences towards smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles.

The 1974 Ambassador underwent a comprehensive restyling, becoming the longest AMC-built version at 217.8 in (5,532 mm). While retaining its previous 122 in (3,099 mm) wheelbase, the new styling was specifically engineered to accommodate the new federal energy-absorbing bumpers at both the front and rear. The Ambassador's overall length increased by 8.2-inch (208 mm) compared to its 1972 counterpart, the last year without bumper standards. This growth is partly attributed to its larger rear bumper and an unusually long front nose. Most full-sized competitor models saw significant increases, except for Chevrolet, which grew 2.8 in (71 mm) during the same period, as its previous bumpers were already pushed out from the bodywork.

The front end of the 1974 Ambassador sedan and wagon received an all-new hood, grille, and bumper. The grille featured a new squared-off loop-type design surrounding the circular, recessed quad headlights, with a distinctive forward-protruding center. The grille insert displayed a crosshatch pattern dominated by two thick horizontal bars that connected the headlight bezels. New amber parking lights were integrated between these bars, following the grille's protrusion forward and overlaid by its crosshatch trim. The headlamp bezels were again blacked out in their recessed areas. The new hood and front bumper followed the grille's central protrusion, giving the car a subtle "coffin nose" look. The contemporary Matador sedan received a similar frontal treatment in 1974, though with a much more pronounced effect and different single headlamp clusters, hood, and grille inserts.

At the rear, the new bumper was substantially larger and backed by shock absorbers, designed to comply with new National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations requiring standardized front and rear bumpers to withstand a 5-mile-per-hour (8 km/h) impact without damage. On sedans, the rear fenders received fiberglass caps that wrapped inward, creating a recessed space for the carryover decklid. Within this space, new rectangular taillight housings were mounted, featuring taller white backup lights positioned inboard of the taillights. The license plate was relocated from the rear bumper to the area between these new taillight assemblies, with the entire taillight and license plate system on sedans encircled by a chrome trim loop. Both the Ambassador and Matador sedans shared this new rear-end styling. The station wagons' cargo area and rear design remained similar to previous Ambassadors, save for the massive new bumper and revised taillamps.

For 1974, the Ambassador Brougham lineup was simplified, no longer offering a two-door hardtop. This left only the four-door sedan and station wagon body styles. The cancellation of the hardtop was partly due to low sales of the previous Ambassador two-door models. Also, it coincided with the introduction of the all-new 1974 Matador coupe. The two-door featured a wide B-pillar, a distinctive long hood, and a short rear deck. Its design was lauded by *Car and Driver* as the "Best Styled Car of 1974" on the magazine cover, and the road test noted how it avoided typical mid-1970s styling hallmarks like imitation landau bars and opera lights.

All Ambassadors came in Brougham trim. The interiors featured luxurious upholstery and trim, including standard 50-50, individually adjustable, reclining front seats. The dashboard received an all-new instrument panel incorporating soft-plastic control knobs with international symbols. Standard "Abbington" fabric upholstery was featured on sedan bench seats, while ventilated woven vinyl trim was standard for wagon bench seats. Optional "Pavillion" fabric was available on individual reclining seats for sedan and station wagon, in black, green, blue, and cinnamon.

The Ambassador station wagon offered standard two-row bench seats for six passengers, with an optional rear-facing third row to accommodate eight seat-belted passengers. As standard equipment, wagons came with numerous practical, appearance, and comfort features, including a versatile two-way-opening tailgate (hinged at the bottom for loading or hauling long cargo, and hinged at the side to open like a door for easy entry/exit). Exterior trim included wood-grained semi-transparent vinyl side and rear panels, a full-length roof rack, and a chrome and wood-grain roof air deflector designed to help keep the tailgate window clean. Ordering the station wagon without the 3M "Di-noc" exterior body trim was possible.

Powertrain selections for 1974 remained consistent with 1973, with only V8 engines and automatic transmissions available. The standard engine was the 304 cu in (5.0 L), with the 360 cu in (5.9 L) and 401 cu in (6.6 L) V8s available. When ordered with a trailer package (which included a special wiring harness with heavy-duty flasher, heavy-duty engine cooling, a handling package, an automatic transmission auxiliary oil cooler, and adjustable air-shock rear suspension), the Ambassador was rated for a substantial 5,000-pound (2,268 kg) towing capacity.

Other mechanical enhancements for 1974 included a larger-capacity fuel tank, increased to 24.9 US gal (94 L; 21 imp gal) for sedans (wagons continued with 17.5 US gal (66 L; 15 imp gal)), and a 62-ampere alternator. New sound insulation was added, making the Ambassador even quieter. All 1974 Ambassadors came with a lengthy list of standard equipment typically optional on competing makes, underscoring its flagship status. These included comfort items such as air conditioning, an AM radio, and a vanity mirror, as well as appearance enhancements like pin striping and whitewall tires. Standard safety features included power steering and power front disc brakes.

The 1974 model year proved challenging for all full-size vehicles in the American market, regardless of the automaker, as the 1973 oil crisis triggered a significant shift in consumer focus towards smaller, more fuel-efficient cars. The overall full-sized, low-priced market segment experienced a sharp 37% drop in sales.

At the same time, AMC was facing increasing demand for its smaller-sized Gremlin and Hornet models, and the automaker was struggling to keep up with production of these more economical cars by 1974. The company was also preparing for the highly anticipated introduction of the Pacer. American Motors decided to discontinue the Ambassador (as well as the Javelin in the shrinking pony car segment) after the 1974 model year to simplify production lines by reducing the number of different models. In June 1974, the final AMC Ambassador rolled off the Kenosha, Wisconsin assembly line. This marked the end of a nameplate that had been in continuous production in some form for 48 years.

Total production for the 1974 Ambassador consisted of 17,901 sedans and 7,070 station wagons, for a combined total of 24,971 Ambassadors during its final model year.


## International assembly

### Argentina

**Industrias Kaiser Argentina** (IKA) produced the U.S. third, fourth, and fifth generation Ambassadors in Córdoba, Argentina from 1962 until 1972, and later became available by special order through 1975. Despite being replaced by AMC in 1967, IKA continued to use the old platform until the end of production in Argentina. As with all export markets, the cars were marketed as "Rambler" even after the name change in the United States.

Assembly of IKA Ramblers began in 1962, with the Argentinean cars being the 1961 U.S. versions, but equipped with 226 cu in (3.70 L) Continental I6 engines producing 119 hp (89 kW; 121 PS) at 4000 rpm, along with a steering column-mounted manual three-speed transmission. The Ambassador 440 was the top-trim IKA model available only as a four-door sedan.

The completely new generation models by AMC in the U.S. for the 1963 model year were also replicated by IKA. The Ambassador sedan came exclusively in 990 trim, and it revolutionized the Argentine automotive market by introducing innovations that included power steering, power windows, and factory-installed air conditioning.

The Ambassador line was redesigned for 1965 in the U.S., as well as for Argentina. All IKA Rambler models now featured the 230.5 cu in (3.78 L) overhead camshaft (OHC) straight-six "Tornado Interceptor" engines producing 145 hp (108 kW; 147 PS) at 4200 rpm. They were originally developed by Kaiser Motors in the U.S. for the 1963 Jeep Gladiator pickups and Wagoneer vehicles. The engine was now produced in Argentina, and it increased the domestic (locally sourced) content of IKA automobiles to lower taxes (tariffs).

The new IKA Ambassador 990 sedans were further upgraded to steering column-mounted ZF four-speed manual transmissions, front disc brakes, front reclining bucket seats with center cushion and armrest, as well as luxury features that included power windows and air conditioning. A road test by *Revista Parabrisas* magazine described the 1965 IKA Rambler Ambassador 990 as "soft, opulent, and smooth ride at all speeds... something big, luxurious and complete... the highest expression of comfort tested so far by the magazine".

Stretch versions of the IKA Rambler Ambassador were used as official government limousines. The "Presidential" models featured a longer rear door and side window, as well as broader C-pillar with padded vinyl roof cover and a small rear window.

### Australia

**Australian Motor Industries** (AMI) obtained the rights to assemble and distribute Ramblers in 1960, starting with the Rambler Ambassador. The 1961, 1962, and 1963 model year Ambassadors were built in Australia at AMI's facilities at Port Melbourne, Victoria. The 1961 sedan, which was powered by a 327 cu in (5.4 L) V8, was the most powerful car being assembled in Australia at that time. Knock-down kits featuring right-hand drive were shipped from Kenosha for assembly by AMI. The Australian-built Ambassadors included a significant percentage of "local content" to gain import tariff (tax) concessions by using parts and components (such as interiors and upholstery) that were sourced from Australian manufacturers. AMI's first year of production resulted in 65 registrations for 1961. Registrations of the 1963 model continued into 1964, with a total of 21 Ambassadors registered for 1964.

Although not documented by AMI records, it is concluded that 20 right-hand drive 1970 Ambassadors were fully imported from Kenosha, apparently 16 two-door hardtops and 4 four-door sedans. A possible reason was that it may have been a holding action while AMI was preparing for the assembly of the new 1970 Rebel. All were fitted with AMC's new 360 cu in (5.9 L) V8 and automatic transmission with floor shift.

The dash and instrument pack of the 1967 Ambassador, which had been converted and used in the RHD Ambassadors assembled for the U.S. Postal Service, was standard in all assembly kits for the Rebel and Matador included in all factory-right-hand drive Rebels, Matadors, and Ambassadors exported to the United Kingdom.

### Costa Rica

Rambler vehicles were marketed in Costa Rica since 1959 through **Purdy Motor**. New local content regulations enacted during the 1960s effectively required vehicles sold in those markets to be assembled from knock-down kits. An assembly plant for Rambler and Toyota vehicles was established, **ECASA**, and the first Ramblers were produced in Costa Rica by the end of 1965. The company built Ambassadors and other AMC models through 1970, with Toyota increasing ownership of ECASA.

### Mexico

American Motors' first-generation Ambassadors were exported to Mexico in the first half of 1958 and assembled locally in the second half of the same year, and in 1959 by **Planta Reo de México** based in Monterrey, Nuevo León. The model was restricted to the four-door hardtop sedan. It was powered by the four-barrel 327 cu in (5.4 L) V8 engine producing 270 hp (201 kW; 274 PS) coupled to a three-speed automatic transmission. The model became the marque's top-of-the-line product alongside the three versions of the midsize Rambler and compact Rambler American models.

However, low sales figures alongside a deteriorating relationship between AMC and Planta REO led to the cancellation of the contract in the second half of 1959.

American Motors again exported its products into Mexico with a new local partner, **Willys Mexicana**. The agreement was signed in March 1960, and production began in Mexico City.

This meant discontinuing the Ambassador line in Mexico as the new operation had several priorities above offering a top-end luxury full-size car line. Aside from marketing the already existing Jeep line, Willys Mexicana focused efforts on the compact Rambler American, which obtained a generation change the following year, meaning a complete retooling of the Vallejo plant. In 1962, legal and industrial requirements in the country became more assertive with the auto industry integration decree issued by the president Adolfo López Mateos in 1962. Among its mandates, it entirely banned the importation of automobile engines. Willys Mexicana began building its engine plant, which was achieved in November 1964. Once the Rambler American was consolidated in the Mexican market, Willys Mexicana opted to expand the product line by introducing the brand-new second-generation Rambler Classic midsize model as a larger luxury counterpart to the economy compact American. Also in 1963, due to problems with WM's parent company (the SOMEX bank) as well as further requirements of the government auto industry decree, Willys Mexicana was reorganized into an entirely new company with expanded capital and direct investment from the Mexican government, Kaiser Willys, and American Motors. This resulted in the formation of **Vehiculos Automotores Mexicanos** (VAM).

After the corporate transition between 1960 and 1964 concluded, in which the Rambler marque under VAM surpassed the commercial results of its local predecessors Armadora Mexicana and Planta REO combined between 1950 and 1959, the company opted not to offer the Ambassador model. The Mexican market of the era was still relatively small. Since the Ambassador mainly shared the same styling as the contemporary midsize model, internal competition would affect the sales of a simultaneous Classic and Ambassador line-up. Unlike the United States, with a larger and more diverse market for two different car lines with the same styling, AMC could differentiate the models with V8 engines for the Ambassador and the Classic limited to six-cylinder versions. This advantage did not exist in Mexico since VAM could only produce six-cylinder engines in its Lerma plant, while V8 engines could not be imported from AMC because of the 1962 decree. Instead, VAM opted to use the Rambler Classic as its most luxurious and flagship model, giving it the same treatment AMC put in the Ambassador model in the US and Canada. This would be passed on to the subsequent equivalent Rebel and Matador models produced under VAM.

The 1958 and 1959 Ambassador models represent the only chapter in this model's history in Mexico. These were the only full-size American Motors products sold in the country, alongside the second generation 1974-1976 VAM Classic (Matador) models. It was also unique because it was a factory V8 model, the only AMC-based car marketed in Mexico with a V8 engine. Six-cylinder engines would power all subsequent models produced by the VAM.
