---
title: "2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States (part 1/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020s_anti-LGBTQ_movement_in_the_United_States
domain: breast-binding
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: breast binding
fetched: 2026-07-05
part: 1/2
---

# 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States

The **2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States** is an ongoing political backlash from social conservatives and the "MAGA" faction of the Republican Party against LGBTQ movements, and in particular against transgender rights. It has included legislative proposals of bathroom use restrictions, bans on gender-affirming care, anti-LGBTQ curriculum laws, attacks on inclusive language, laws against drag performances, book bans, boycotts, and conspiracy theories about grooming.

Between 2018 and 2026, thousands of anti-LGBTQ laws were considered, drawing heavily from the British anti-trans movement, with more than one hundred passed into law. Targeting of transgender people escalated under the second Donald Trump administration. The backlash has been described as a moral panic, and part of a larger culture war in the United States. Scholars have cited rising anti-LGBTQ attitudes and policies as an example of democratic backsliding in the United States. The backlash has been connected to similar right-wing developments in Europe, Canada, as well as the Middle East.


## Grooming conspiracy theory

Members of the far-right and a number of mainstream conservatives, mostly in the United States, have used the term "groomer" to falsely accuse LGBTQ people, as well as their allies and progressives in general, of systematically using LGBTQ sex education and campaigns for LGBTQ rights as a method of child grooming and enabling pedophilia. Usage of this term increased in the 2020s. In the United States, the popularization of the term was linked to Christopher Rufo and James A. Lindsay in August 2021. Following the Wi Spa controversy in July 2021, Julia Serano said a rise in false accusations of grooming directed towards transgender people was a movement to "lay the foundation for just smearing all trans people as child sexual predators". Teachers and parents have also been accused of being or enabling groomers.

The conspiracy theory moved into the American conservative mainstream in spring 2022, including its use by members of the Republican Party, the Heritage Foundation, and far-right extremists and conspiracy theorists. This has been described as a moral panic and a smear. In April 2022, the left-leaning media watchdog Media Matters published a study stating that within a three-week period spanning from March 17 to April 6, Fox News ran 170 segments on trans people, throughout which the network "repeatedly invoked the long-debunked myth that trans people pose a threat to minors and seek to groom them".


## Education (pre-2025)

### Anti-LGBTQ curriculum laws

In July 2022, a wave of anti-LGBTQ curriculum resurgence saw ten such laws beginning to take effect in six different states: Florida, Indiana, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah and Alabama. Some states enacting these new laws appear to have mirrored similar laws from other states.

In Florida, the Parental Rights in Education law and Florida Board of Education policy bans education on "sexual orientation" or "gender identity" unless it is mandated under state academic standards or as part of an optional reproductive health course or lesson. In August 2023, the state of Florida dropped AP Psychology as a course offering, due to a required section on sexual orientation and gender identity. The same month, Tampa-area schools announced they would restrict the teaching of William Shakespeare's works in order to comply with the Parental Rights in Education law.

Alabama bans LGBTQ topics for kindergarten to grade 5, except for instruction deemed "age or developmentally appropriate". Five other states (Montana, Arizona, Arkansas, Tennessee and Florida) require parental notification of instruction on LGBTQ issues and allows parents to opt-out of such instruction.

In California (where state law requires students to learn about the "role and contributions" of LGBTQ people in history), multiple protests against the inclusion of LGBTQ-friendly curriculum resulted in violence. At a June 2023 protest in Glendale, individuals seen protesting LGBTQ curriculum were identified as members of hate groups, such as the Proud Boys.

### Policies regarding trans students

Local K-12 school boards across the country have adopted a variety of policies regarding trans students, including allowing fully equal rights and non-discrimination for trans students; requiring trans students to submit to a criminal background check to be allowed to use the bathroom consistent with their gender identity; implementing full bans on expressing one's self-declared gender at all, including bans on chosen pronouns and pride flags and even bans on mentioning the very existence of trans people. State and local officials in the South used indecency and obscenity laws to ban books from school libraries.

### Rollback of discrimination protections

In June 2021, the Biden administration reinforced that Title IX protected LGBTQ students from discrimination by including sexual orientation and gender identity in its list of protections.

In August 2021, Tennessee and nineteen other states sued the Department of Education in *Tennessee v. Department of Education*, alleging that the new Title IX governance constitutes government overreach. A preliminary injunction was granted by a Tennessee judge in July 2022, blocking enforcement of the new guidance. In December 2022, the Department of Education appealed the decision, which is still pending.

The new guidance was rejected by the Florida Department of Education, calling the guidance a "sexual ideology" that risks the "health, safety, and welfare of Florida students".


## Anti-trans laws (pre-2025)

### Gender transition

As many as 13 U.S. states banned gender affirming health care for transgender youth in the early-2020s.

#### Treatment for adults

Many Republican legislators across the country are increasingly proposing legislation that would restrict gender-affirming care for adults or make such treatments harder to access. However, unlike for minors, no states have fully banned gender-affirming care for adults. Efforts to restrict adults' access to healthcare rely heavily on claims from self-described "gender-critical" organizations such as Genspect that young people should not be recognized as adults until they turn 25.

As of January 2024, seven states limit access to gender-affirming care for adults in some way without banning it, such as allowing private health plans, Medicaid, and correctional facilities to exclude all coverage for gender-affirming care, prohibiting the use of federal funds for gender-affirming care or requiring informed consent practices beyond those typically required in medical practice.

In January 2024, some Republican legislators in Ohio and Michigan expressed their desire to ban gender-affirming healthcare altogether, saying their 'endgame' was to ban it completely for people of all ages.

In July 2025, Puerto Rico became the first place in the United States to pass a ban on gender-affirming care for people over 18, banning it for anyone under 21 years of age. Puerto Rico's LGBTQ+ Federation immediately announced plans to challenge the ban in court.

These states have policies making it easier for trans adults to sue their doctors:

- Utah: In January 2023, Utah stripped liability protections from any doctor who treats a trans person under the age of 25, and allowing any trans person under 25 to retroactively "disaffirm" consent and sue the doctor for providing care they had at the time consented to.
- South Dakota: In February 2023, South Dakota passed a similar law as Utah's, but without any age limit.
- Arkansas: On March 13, 2023, Governor Sarah Huckabee Sanders signed a bill giving adults 15 years to file malpractice lawsuits for gender-affirming care they received as minors, whereas for other types of care (under pre-existing law) a malpractice lawsuit must generally be filed within two years.

These states have policies that restrict treatment for trans adults, as well as younger people:

- Florida: In August 2022, the state of Florida voted to require any trans adult seeking gender affirming healthcare to receive approval from the Florida Board of Medicine at least 24 hours in advance. On May 17, 2023, DeSantis signed a law banning insurance providers from covering gender-affirming care for adults, as well as banning nurse practitioners and physicians' assistants (estimated to make up 80% of gender affirming care providers) from administering it, and banning it from being offered via telehealth. The Florida state legislature had passed the bill the previous month. In June 2024, a judge permanently blocked the law from taking effect. In August 2024, the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals stayed the permanent injunction while the matter is appealed.
- Missouri: In April 2023, the state attorney general issued an emergency order instituting a three-year waiting period of continuous documented dysphoria before qualifying for gender-affirming care, disqualifying people if they have untreated depression or anxiety, mandates a screening for autism, and mandating regular screenings for "social contagion". This has been characterized by many as a de facto ban on trans healthcare for adults, since depression and anxiety are common symptoms of gender dysphoria. A judge temporarily blocked enforcement of the order and scheduled a hearing for May 11. The attorney general withdrew this order on May 16 after the state legislature passed two bills restricting gender-affirming care for trans youth. On June 7, 2023, Governor Mike Parson signed a bill that contained a provision banning gender-affirming care for prisoners, which took effect on August 28.
- Puerto Rico: In July, 2025, Puerto Rico implemented a ban on gender affirming care for anyone under 21 years of age. Puerto Rico's LGBTQ+ Federation immediately announced plans to challenge the ban in court.

#### Treatment for minors

Gender-affirming care for minors has been available in the U.S. for more than a decade and is endorsed by major medical associations, but it has increasingly come under attack in many conservative legislatures. According to the ACLU, in 2023 alone, over 500 anti-LGBTQ bills were submitted in the US, over 130 of which were about healthcare. Efforts to prohibit gender-affirming care for minors had begun several years earlier, but did not receive much attention from state legislatures until more recently. The conservative organization Do No Harm was influential in developing model legislation that appeared starting in 2022 in Arkansas, Florida, Iowa, Mississippi, Montana, New Hampshire, and West Virginia legislatures.

In February 2024, the American Psychological Association approved a policy statement supporting unobstructed access to health care and evidence-based clinical care for transgender, gender-diverse, and nonbinary children, adolescents, and adults, as well as opposing state bans and policies intended to limit access to such care.

As of June 2025, 27 states had enacted some form of ban on gender-affirming care for minors, 19 of which were enacted in 2023. However, 16 of these bans are being challenged in court as of January 2024. Furthermore, only 21 of the 27 states have complete bans which are fully in effect. Four states have only partial bans and two are currently blocked from taking effect. While some states have banned all forms of medical transition, others such as Arizona, Nebraska and Georgia have banned only specific types such as hormone therapy or surgery. Seven states have exceptions which allow minors who were already receiving gender affirming care prior to the ban to continue their treatments. Currently, all 27 states make exceptions for puberty blockers, hormones and surgery for cisgender and intersex children. There is only one state, Missouri, that has a ban which is set to expire after a certain period of time. Nearly all states with restrictions include specific provisions with penalties for providers and 4 states include provisions directed at parents or guardians. An additional 4 states include laws/policies that impact school officials such as teachers and counselors, among others.

Many Democratic states have gone in the opposite direction and enacted laws protecting access to gender affirming care for minors and adults. These laws, often called "shield" laws, often explicitly combine protections for gender-affirming care and abortion and cover a variety of protections including protecting both providers and patients from being punished, mandating insurance providers to cover the procedures and acting as "sanctuary states" that protect patients traveling to the state from other states that have banned such treatments among other things. As of June 2026, 18 states and the District of Columbia have enacted "shield" laws.

Of the approximately 1.6 million Americans who are transgender, about 300,000 are under the age of 18. As of October 2023, approximately 105,200 transgender youth aged 13 to 17 lived in states where gender affirming care is banned for minors. However, around 26,000 of those youth are currently still able to access care in their state due to court orders that prohibit enforcement of the laws. Conversely, around 146,700 transgender youth live in states that have passed gender-affirming care "shield" laws that support access to care by protecting doctors and parents who prescribe or seek access to medical care for youth. An analysis from KFF in late January 2024 estimated that 38% of trans youth between the ages of 13–17 in the United States lived in states with laws limiting youth access to gender-affirming care.

Bans on gender-affirming care have been criticized as governments interfering with the patient-doctor relationship and taking away healthcare decisions from parents and families for their children. State level bans on gender-affirming care in the United States have led some families with transgender children to move out of their states.

On October 17, 2024, Texas attorney general Ken Paxton filed suit against a doctor who allegedly provided gender-affirming care to 21 minors after the treatments had been banned for minors in Texas, the first time that such a suit has been brought in the U.S.

#### Bans for minors

Laws which are currently unenforceable due to a court injunction

Laws which only partially ban gender affirming care for minors

| State | Authority | Signed | Effective | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Arkansas | State legislature | April 6, 2021 | Permanently blocked | On April 6, 2021, the legislature—overriding Governor Asa Hutchinson's veto on a bill that banned puberty blockers, hormones, and surgery for minors and from referring them to other providers. However, courts temporarily and then permanently blocked the law. |
| Texas | Texas AG Ken Paxton Governor Greg Abbott | February 22, 2022 June 2, 2023 | Blocked by injunction (order) September 1, 2023 (legislation) | In February 2022, the state Attorney General ordered a ban on gender-affirming care for trans youth, with criminal penalties for failing to report suspected violations. However, the order is currently blocked by injunction. In June 2023, the governor signed a law to ban this care for minors. On August 25, 2023, a district court judge blocked the law from taking effect. In response, the Attorney General's office filed an appeal with the Texas Supreme Court, a move that automatically pauses the judge's injunction and allowed the law to go into effect on September 1, 2023, as originally planned. On June 28, 2024, the Texas Supreme Court upheld the law. |
| Alabama | Governor Kay Ivey | April 8, 2022 | May 8, 2022 | It is a felony for a medical provider to give gender-affirming healthcare to transgender people under 19 (the age of majority in Alabama). In May 2022, a federal judge ruled that the ban on surgery was enforceable. However, the ban on puberty blockers and hormones was not enforceable while the law is challenged in court. In August 2023, the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision, allowing the ban on puberty blockers and hormones to take effect. |
| Utah | Governor Spencer Cox | January 27, 2023 |   |   |
| South Dakota | Governor Kristi Noem | February 13, 2023 |   |   |
| Mississippi | Governor Tate Reeves | February 28, 2023 |   |   |
| Tennessee | Governor Bill Lee | March 2, 2023 |   |   |
| Florida | Florida Board of Medicine Governor Ron DeSantis |   | August 26, 2024 (legislation) Blocked (state board of medicine rule) | The state board of medicine rule took effect on March 16, 2023. Additionally, on May 17, 2023, Governor DeSantis signed a ban into law, and it took effect immediately. It applies only to new patients, not those who were already receiving gender-affirming care. However, on June 6, 2023, a court temporarily blocked enforcement of both the board rule and the law. In June 2024, a judge permanently blocked the law from taking effect. In August 2024, the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals stayed the permanent injunction while the matter is appealed. |
| Iowa | Governor Kim Reynolds | March 22, 2023 |   |   |
| Georgia | Governor Brian Kemp | March 23, 2023 | July 1, 2023 | Bans hormones and surgery while continuing to allow puberty blockers. Minors who began hormones prior to July 1, 2023, are allowed to continue treatment. |
| West Virginia | Governor Jim Justice | March 29, 2023 |   | The bill made exceptions for minors who have received parental consent and are diagnosed with "severe gender dysphoria" by two doctors. Due to this exception, experts did not expect the ban to have much of an impact. In May 2025, Governor Patrick Morrisey signed a bill ending this exception. |
| Kentucky | State legislature | March 29, 2023 | July 14, 2023 | The legislature overrode Governor Andy Beshear's veto, banning gender-affirming healthcare for trans minors. Federal appeals judges allowed the ban to remain in effect during legal challenges to overturn it. |
| Arizona | Governor Doug Ducey | March 30, 2022 | March 31, 2023 | Bans gender-affirming surgery for minors, but not hormones and puberty blockers. The bill also makes some exceptions, including in the case of someone born intersex. In mid 2023, a new Governor, Katie Hobbs reversed course by signing a series of executive orders which include shield-style protections for gender-affirming care, ensuring that it remains legal in Arizona. It also bans conversion therapy, requires insurance plans to cover gender-affirming care and bars state agencies from cooperating with civil and criminal cases in states where gender-affirming health care is illegal. |
| Idaho | Governor Brad Little | April 4, 2023 | April 15, 2024 | It would also make it a felony for any medical practitioner to help a minor seek gender-affirming treatment. On December 27, 2023, a federal judge blocked the law from taking effect. On April 15, 2024, the US Supreme Court responded to an emergency request filed in February by temporarily allowing the ban to go into effect while further legal challenges to it play out in the lower courts. The ruling did not resolve the underlying legal challenges raised by the case nor did the justices rule on the larger issue of bans on gender-affirming treatment for minors. The ruling also does not apply to the two plaintiffs in the lawsuit. |
| Indiana | Governor Eric Holcomb | April 5, 2023 | February 27, 2024 | On June 16, 2023, a federal judge temporarily blocked the law from taking effect. On February 27, 2024, the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision allowing the ban to take effect. |
| North Dakota | Governor Doug Burgum | April 20, 2023 |   | On April 20, 2023, North Dakota Governor Doug Burgum signed a law criminalizing trans health care for minors. However, the law notably makes exceptions for medication treatment for "rare circumstances with parental consent". The law also allows medication treatment for early onset puberty and minors who were already receiving gender-affirming care will still be able to receive treatment. |
| Montana | Governor Greg Gianforte | April 28, 2023 | Ban unenforceable | On September 27, 2023, a Montana District Court judge prevented it from taking effect. On December 11, 2024, the Montana Supreme Court upheld the lower court's decision, suggesting the ban is likely unconstitutional, and sent it back to the district court for trial. If the ban does take effect, some treatments would remain legal for minors who are not suffering from gender dysphoria. On May 13, 2025, a Montana court struck down the ban on healthcare for transgender youth. |
| North Carolina | State legislature |   | August 17, 2023 | Ban on gender-affirming care, such as hormones, puberty blockers, and surgery, for minors. The ban only applies to transgender children and still allows such treatments for intersex and cisgender children. The ban also only applies to new patients. Transgender children who started treatment prior to August 1, 2023, will be allowed to continue receiving treatment. Governor Roy Cooper vetoed the bill on July 5, 2023, but the state legislature overruled his veto on August 17, therefore making the bill law. |
| Missouri | Governor Mike Parson | June 7, 2023 | August 28, 2023 | People receiving puberty blockers or hormones before the ban went into effect may continue taking them. Otherwise, blockers and hormones are banned until 2027. Surgery is also banned. |
| Louisiana | State Legislature |   | January 1, 2024 | On June 29, 2023, John Bel Edwards vetoed a ban on blockers, hormones, and surgery for minors. On July 18, the Louisiana State Legislature overrode his veto. |
| Oklahoma | Governor Kevin Stitt | May 1, 2023 |   | On May 1, 2023, Governor Kevin Stitt signed a bill that makes it a felony for doctors to provide gender-transition medical care for anyone under the age of 18. In October 2023, a judge declined to stop the law from taking effect. |
| Nebraska | Governor Jim Pillen | October 2, 2023 | October 2, 2023 | On October 2, 2023, the state Department of Health and Human Services announced that Republican Governor Jim Pillen had approved emergency regulations banning gender affirming surgeries for minors. Puberty blockers and hormone treatments for minors still remain legal, however applicants must now wait seven days and undergo at least 40 hours of "clinically neutral" therapy before starting them. The new regulations went into effect immediately. |
| Ohio | State legislature |   | April 30, 2025 | On January 5, 2024, Governor Mike DeWine signed an executive order banning gender-affirming surgeries for minors. Previously, on December 29, 2023, he had vetoed the Saving Adolescents from Experimentation (SAFE) Act (HB68) passed (mostly along party lines) by the Ohio Legislature on December 13 which banned gender-affirming surgeries as well as hormones and puberty blockers for minors. The bill includes exceptions for this kind of care for non-transgender youth, and it allows children who were already receiving gender-affirming care in Ohio to continue their treatment. On January 24, 2024, the legislature overrode DeWine's veto thereby making HB68 law. On April 16, 2024, a judge temporarily blocked the ban from taking effect. On August 6, 2024, a judge overturned the injunction and allowed the law to take effect immediately. On March 18, 2025, the state's 10th District Court of Appeale reversed the judge's decision and reinstated the injunction. On April 30, 2025, the Supreme Court of Ohio ruled 4-3 that the ban could take effect while further court battles play out. |
| Wyoming | Governor Mark Gordon | March 22, 2024 | July 1, 2024 | On March 22, 2024, Wyoming Governor Mark Gordon signed a law criminalizing trans health care for minors. |
| South Carolina | Governor Henry McMaster | May 21, 2024 | May 21, 2024 | On May 21, 2024, South Carolina Governor Henry McMaster signed a law banning trans health care for minors. The law, which went into effect immediately, also requires principals, teachers and other school staff members to tell parents when their children want to use a name other than their legal one, or pronouns that do not match their sex assigned at birth. It also bars adults under 26 from using Medicaid to cover the costs for trans health care. This part of the bill is in direct opposition to a 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruling from the month prior which ruled that state Medicaid bans on gender-affirming care in the 4th Circuit, which includes South Carolina, are unconstitutional. |
| New Hampshire | Governor Chris Sununu (genital surgeries) Governor Kelly Ayotte (puberty blockers, hormones and other surgeries) | July 19, 2024 (genital surgeries) August 1, 2025 (puberty blockers, hormones and other surgeries) | January 1, 2025 (genital surgeries) January 1, 2026 (puberty blockers, hormones and other surgeries) | On July 19, 2024, New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu signed a law banning gender-affirming genital surgeries for minors. However, puberty blockers, hormones and non-genital surgeries such as mastectomies remained legal for trans youth. On August 1, 2025, Governor Kelly Ayotte signed a bill ending puberty blockers, hormones and non-genital surgeries for minors in the state too. However, the bill contains an exception which allows minors already receiving care to continue it. |
| Kansas | State legislature |   | Blocked | On February 18, 2025, the Kansas state legislature overrode Governor Laura Kelly's veto of Senate Bill 63 which bans gender-affirming care for minors. Children already receiving gender-affirming care in Kansas must stop receiving it by December 31, 2025. On May 17, 2026, Kansas judge issued a temporary injunction against the ban, saying it likely violates the state constitution. |
| Puerto Rico | Governor Jenniffer González-Colón | July 17, 2025 | July 17, 2025 | On July 17, 2025, Puerto Rico Governor Jenniffer González-Colón signed Senate Bill 350 which bans on gender-affirming care for anyone under 21 years of age. It also bars public funding for gender-affirming care and threatens doctors who violate the ban with up to 15 years in prison, a $50,000 fine, and the permanent loss of their licenses. Puerto Rico's LGBTQ+ Federation immediately announced plans to challenge the ban in court. |

#### Protections for minors

| State | Authority | Signed | Effective | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Connecticut | Governor Ned Lamont | May 5, 2022 | May 5, 2022 | On May 5, 2022, Governor Ned Lamont signed House Bill 5414, a shield law that designates Connecticut as a "safe harbor" which protects people who provide abortions and gender affirming care in the state, as well as legal protections for people seeking abortions and gender-affirming health care from out-of-state. |
| Massachusetts | Governor Charlie Baker | July 29, 2022 | July 29, 2022 | On July 29, 2022, Governor Charlie Baker signed a shield law which protects access to abortion and gender-affirming health care in the state. |
| California | Governor Gavin Newsom | September 30, 2022 | January 1, 2023 | On September 30, 2022, Governor Gavin Newsom signed SB 107, a shield law which designates California as a "sanctuary state" for trans youth and their families who are fleeing from other states that have banned the practice. |
| District of Columbia | Mayor Muriel Bowser | November 21, 2022 | November 21, 2022 | On November 21, 2022, Mayor Muriel Bowser signed into law D.C. ACT 24-646, the Human Rights Sanctuary Amendment Act of 2022, which protects the right to bodily autonomy and of those seeking care for abortion, contraception, sexual conduct, intimate relationships, and gender affirmation. |
| Illinois | Governor JB Pritzker | January 13, 2023 | January 13, 2023 | On January 13, 2023, Governor JB Pritzker signed into law HB4664, a reproductive rights and gender affirming care omnibus bill that protects health care providers and their patients from legal attacks by neighboring states and expands reproductive and gender affirming health care access and options across the state. The bill takes historic action to protect Illinois providers and their patients, thousands of whom have traveled to Illinois to access essential care now banned in their home states. |
| New Mexico | Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham | March 16, 2023 | March 16, 2023 | On March 16, 2023, Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham signed into law House Bill 7, the Reproductive and Gender-Affirming Health Care Act, which prohibits public bodies, including local municipalities, from denying, restricting, or discriminating against an individual's right to use or refuse reproductive health care or health care related to gender. |
| Vermont | Governor Phil Scott | March 29, 2023 | September 2023 | On March 29, 2023, Governor Phil Scott signed into law House Bill 89 and Senate Bill 37, which establish a slate of protections for both providers and seekers of gender affirming health care, as well as those seeking or administering abortions. |
| New Jersey | Governor Phil Murphy | April 4, 2023 | April 4, 2023 | On April 4, 2023, Governor Phil Murphy signed Executive Order No. 326 establishing New Jersey as a safe haven for gender-affirming health care by directing all state departments and agencies to protect all persons, including health care professionals and patients, against potential repercussions resulting from providing, receiving, assisting in providing or receiving, seeking, or traveling to New Jersey to obtain gender-affirming health care services. |
| Colorado | Governor Jared Polis | April 14, 2023 | April 14, 2023 | On April 14, 2023, Governor Jared Polis signed into law a trio of health care bills enshrining access to abortion and gender-affirming procedures and medications in Colorado. These bills ensure people in surrounding states and beyond can go to Colorado to have an abortion, begin puberty blockers or receive gender-affirming surgery without fear of prosecution. |
| Minnesota | Governor Tim Walz | April 27, 2023 | April 27, 2023 | On April 27, 2023, Governor Tim Walz signed a shield law which protects minors fleeing from other states to receive gender-affirming care. |
| Washington | Governor Jay Inslee | May 9, 2023 | May 9, 2023 | On May 9, 2023, Governor Jay Inslee signed a shield law designating Washington as a "sanctuary state" for trans youth. |
| Maryland | Governor Wes Moore | June 6, 2023 | June 6, 2023 | On June 6, 2023, Governor Wes Moore signed an executive order to protect gender affirming health care in Maryland. The order will protect those seeking, receiving, or providing gender affirming care in Maryland from attempts at legal punishment by other states. The executive order was codified into law by the Trans Shield Act, which Moore signed into law on May 16, 2024. |
| New York | Governor Kathy Hochul | June 26, 2023 | June 26, 2023 | On June 26, 2023, Governor Kathy Hochul signed a shield law designating New York as a "sanctuary state" for trans youth. This law protects access to transition-related medical care for transgender minors and bars state courts from enforcing the laws of other states that might authorize a child to be taken away if the parents provide gender-affirming medical care, including puberty blockers and hormone therapy. It also prohibits New York courts from considering transition-related care for minors as child abuse and bars state and local authorities from cooperating with out-of-state agencies regarding the provision of lawful gender-affirming care in New York. |
| Arizona | Governor Katie Hobbs | June 28, 2023 | June 28, 2023 | On March 30, 2022, Governor Doug Ducey signed a bill banning gender-affirming surgery for minors, but not hormones and puberty blockers. The bill also makes some exceptions, including in the case of someone born intersex. On June 28, 2023, a new Governor, Katie Hobbs reversed course by signing a series of executive orders which include shield-style protections for gender-affirming care, ensuring that it remains legal in Arizona. It also bans conversion therapy, requires insurance plans to cover gender-affirming care and bars state agencies from cooperating with civil and criminal cases in states where gender-affirming health care is illegal. |
| Oregon | Governor Tina Kotek | July 13, 2023 | July 13, 2023 | On May 9, 2023, Governor Tina Kotek signed a law protecting access to abortion and gender affirming care for trans youth. Minors between the ages of 15 and 17 can receive gender affirming care without parental permission, whereas youth ages 14 and under must have parental permission. |
| Maine | Governor Janet Mills | April 23, 2024 | April 23, 2024 | On April 23, 2024, Governor Janet Mills signed a shield law designating Maine as a "sanctuary state" for gender-affirming care and abortion providers and makes access to such treatments "legal rights" in Maine. It states that criminal and civil actions against providers and patients are not enforceable if the access to that care occurred in Maine. Additionally, the bill prevents cooperation with out-of-state arrest warrants for gender-affirming care and abortion that happen within the state. It also protects doctors who provide gender-affirming care and abortion from actions by medical boards, malpractice insurance, and other regulating entities that seek to economically harm them or dissuade them from providing care. The bill also explicitly enshrines WPATH's Standards of Care into state law for the coverage of transgender healthcare. |
| Rhode Island | Governor Daniel McKee | June 25, 2024 | June 25, 2024 | On June 25, 2024, Governor Daniel McKee signed a shield law designating Rhode Island as a "sanctuary state" for gender-affirming care and abortion providers and makes access to such treatments "legal rights" in Rhode Island. The bill also protects providers from being sued for providing care. |
| Delaware | Governor Matt Meyer | June 20, 2025 | June 20, 2025 | On June 20, 2025, Governor Matt Meyer signed Executive Order No. 11 establishing Delaware as a "sanctuary state" for gender-affirming care by protecting patients and providers from bans and restrictions in other states. It also forbids state agencies from giving up "medical records, data or billing information, or utilize state resources that could help any criminal or civil investigation against someone receiving or providing gender-affirming care" and prohibits the state professional regulations board from disbarring healthcare providers because they provide gender-affirming care. |
| Hawaii | Governor Josh Green | May 29, 2026 | July 1, 2026 | On May 29, 2026, Governor Josh Green signed House Bill 1875, also known as Act 059, a shield law to explicitly protect providers of gender-affirming care and the patients that receive it. The bill also contains protections against "abusive litigation", bans medical malpractice insurers and health carriers from taking adverse actions against gender-affirming care providers, and clarifies permitted disclosures of protected healthcare information in response to new federal regulations. |

### Legal documents

While all 50 states had previously allowed transgender people to change their legal names and documented genders, many states in the 2020s implemented restrictions. These restrictions ranged from requiring sterilization to obtain amended documents, to making it a criminal offense to carry a state ID not matching one's assigned gender at birth.

In January 2025, in response to Executive Order 14168, the U.S. federal government ceased issuing passports which do not align with the birth-assigned sex of U.S. citizens. Following court challenges, the U.S. Supreme Court would, through its shadow docket in *Orr v. Trump*, allow this measure to remain in effect.

In 2026, the state government of Kansas passed legislation immediately invalidating driver's licenses and birth certificates which do not align with the assigned sex at birth of their recipients, requiring affected residents to pay for updated documents reflecting their birth sex. The law was initially vetoed by Democrat governor Laura Kelly, but went into effect after the motion was overruled by the state legislature's Republican supermajority. American Civil Liberties Union attorney Harper Seldin criticized the law as "put[ting] transgender people in danger any time they interact with law enforcement or apply for a job or for housing or public benefits" while claiming that it would increase the risk of anti-trans discrimination and violence. Seldin stated that the ACLU expects to challenge the law in court. Kansas representative Abi Boatman, a transgender woman and Democrat, additionally derided the law as "culture war nonsense" and accused it of contributing to Kansas' human capital flight.

### Sports bans

Some U.S. states passed legislation restricting the participation of transgender youth in high school sports or of trans women and girls in women's sports.

Twenty-six U.S. States have banned transgender people from sports under their gender identity in various capacities. These states include Texas, Arkansas, Florida, Alabama, Oklahoma, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee, West Virginia, South Carolina, Utah, South Dakota, Montana, Iowa, Arizona, Idaho, Wyoming, Indiana, Louisiana, Kansas, Georgia, North Dakota, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Alaska and Ohio. The passage of legislation against transgender youth has seen increases in calls to Trans Lifeline, a suicide crisis hotline run by and for transgender people. Some of these bans only apply to school sports and some only apply to transgender women, but not transgender men. The US Department of Education has said transgender students are protected under Title IX.

- In Indiana, schools rely on anatomical sex, requiring gender reassignment surgery for trans athletes to participate in the sport of their identified gender.
- Nebraska has formed a Gender Identity Eligibility Committee that decides on a case-by-case basis of how each transgender athlete can participate as their self-identified gender.
- Texas, Alabama, North Carolina, Kentucky, Idaho, and Florida require trans athletes to compete based on their assigned sex.
- In Alaska, Connecticut, Georgia, Kansas, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, each school district makes their own decision on how to include transgender athletes.
- Maine gives approval for students to choose which team they wish to play on, approving based on safety and fairness.
- New Jersey and New Mexico require that trans athletes provide evidence that they have transitioned or are transitioning.
- Missouri and Ohio require athletes to undergo hormone treatment. Ohio requires that the athlete must have been on the hormones for at least a year prior to competing.
- Oregon allows those who identify as male to participate on male teams, and they are then on excluded from girls' competitions. Those transitioning from male to female must be on hormone treatment for at least a year.
- Iowa bans transgender girls and women from playing female sports. No such stipulation applies to transgender boys and men with regard to male sports.
- Oklahoma requires that any student participating in sports must submit a notarized affidavit of gender assigned at birth, under penalty of perjury.

### Bathroom bills

In an early example of an anti-trans bathroom bill, the Public Facilities Privacy & Security Act in North Carolina, was approved as a law in 2016. The bill, however, sparked widespread condemnation and threats of boycotts, and portions of the measure were repealed in 2017 as part of a compromise between the Democratic governor and Republican-controlled Legislature. In 2016, guidance was issued by the U.S. Departments of Justice and Education stating that schools which receive federal money must treat a student as their gender identity (for example, in regard to bathrooms). This policy was revoked by the Trump administration in 2017.

In the 2020s, bathroom bills have been proposed and debated in a number of state legislatures. According to the American Civil Liberties Union, there are currently 469 anti-LGBTQ bills in the US, most targeting transgender people; an example of which is Kansas SB 180. Several state bills are based on and closely resemble model legislation provided by the Christian legal organization Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF). The ADF's model legislation proposes giving any public school or university student the right to sue for $2,500 for each time they encountered a transgender classmate in a locker room or bathroom.

A number of the bills put forth and passed made it some form of criminal offense, often a sex offense, for a transgender person to use a bathroom, locker room, changing room, or other similar facility not corresponding with their assigned sex. The most severe of these was that of Arkansas, which made it an offense of "sexual indecency with a child" for a trans person to use any such facility if said facility contained anyone under 18 at the time of use.

Since 2021, Alabama, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Idaho have enacted bathroom bills. State legislatures in Arizona, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas have proposed bathroom bills. The National Center for Transgender Equality, an LGBTQ advocacy group, calls these bills discriminatory.

In December 2022, sitting *en banc*, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ruled in *Adams ex rel. Kasper v. School Board of St. Johns County, Florida* that separating the use of male and female bathrooms in public schools based on a student's biological sex doesn't violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment or Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972. Previously, in August 2020, a three judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed a 2018 lower court ruling in *Adams v. The School Board of St. Johns County* that discrimination on the basis of gender identity is discrimination "on the basis of sex" and is prohibited under Title IX (federal civil rights law) and the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the US Constitution.

### Prisons

In 2024, Missouri implemented a law discontinuing state funding of gender-affirming care for prison inmates. Florida prisons implemented a rule restricting gender-affirming care, and providing psychotherapy to treat underlying mental health issues. An attorney of the ACLU likened this to conversion therapy.
