---
title: "Weierstrass elliptic function"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weierstrass_elliptic_function
domain: elliptic-curves-math
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: elliptic curve, mordell-weil theorem, weierstrass elliptic function, elliptic integral
fetched: 2026-07-02
---

# Weierstrass elliptic function

In mathematics, the **Weierstrass elliptic functions** are elliptic functions that take a particularly simple form. They are named for Karl Weierstrass. This class of functions is also referred to as **℘-functions** and they are usually denoted by the symbol ℘, a uniquely fancy script *p*. They play an important role in the theory of elliptic functions, i.e., meromorphic functions that are doubly periodic. A ℘-function together with its derivative can be used to parameterize elliptic curves and they generate the field of elliptic functions with respect to a given period lattice.

Symbol for Weierstrass $\wp$ -function

## Motivation

A cubic of the form $C_{g_{2},g_{3}}^{\mathbb {C} }=\{(x,y)\in \mathbb {C} ^{2}:y^{2}=4x^{3}-g_{2}x-g_{3}\}$ , where $g_{2},g_{3}\in \mathbb {C}$ are complex numbers with $g_{2}^{3}-27g_{3}^{2}\neq 0$ , cannot be rationally parameterized. Yet one still wants to find a way to parameterize it.

For the quadric $K=\left\{(x,y)\in \mathbb {R} ^{2}:x^{2}+y^{2}=1\right\}$ ; the unit circle, there exists a (non-rational) parameterization using the sine function and its derivative the cosine function: ${\displaystyle \psi$ Because of the periodicity of the sine and cosine $\mathbb {R} /2\pi \mathbb {Z}$ is chosen to be the domain, so the function is bijective.

In a similar way one can get a parameterization of $C_{g_{2},g_{3}}^{\mathbb {C} }$ by means of the doubly periodic $\wp$ -function and its derivative, namely via $(x,y)=(\wp (z),\wp '(z))$ . This parameterization has the domain $\mathbb {C} /\Lambda$ , which is topologically equivalent to a torus.

There is another analogy to the trigonometric functions. Consider the integral function $a(x)=\int _{0}^{x}{\frac {dy}{\sqrt {1-y^{2}}}}.$ It can be simplified by substituting $y=\sin t$ and $s=\arcsin x$ : $a(x)=\int _{0}^{s}dt=s=\arcsin x.$ That means $a^{-1}(x)=\sin x$ . So the sine function is an inverse function of an integral function.

Elliptic functions are the inverse functions of elliptic integrals. In particular, let: $u(z)=\int _{z}^{\infty }{\frac {ds}{\sqrt {4s^{3}-g_{2}s-g_{3}}}}.$ Then the extension of $u^{-1}$ to the complex plane equals the $\wp$ -function. This invertibility is used in complex analysis to provide a solution to certain nonlinear differential equations satisfying the Painlevé property, i.e., those equations that admit poles as their only movable singularities.

## Definition

Let $\omega _{1},\omega _{2}\in \mathbb {C}$ be two complex numbers that are linearly independent over $\mathbb {R}$ and let ${\displaystyle \Lambda$ be the period lattice generated by those numbers. Then the $\wp$ -function is defined as follows:

$\wp (z,\omega _{1},\omega _{2}):=\wp (z)={\frac {1}{z^{2}}}+\sum _{\lambda \in \Lambda \setminus \{0\}}\left({\frac {1}{(z-\lambda )^{2}}}-{\frac {1}{\lambda ^{2}}}\right).$

This series converges locally uniformly absolutely in the complex torus $\mathbb {C} /\Lambda$ .

It is common to use 1 and $\tau$ in the upper half-plane $\mathbb {H$ as generators of the lattice. Dividing by ${\textstyle \omega _{1}}$ maps the lattice $\mathbb {Z} \omega _{1}+\mathbb {Z} \omega _{2}$ isomorphically onto the lattice $\mathbb {Z} +\mathbb {Z} \tau$ with ${\textstyle \tau ={\tfrac {\omega _{2}}{\omega _{1}}}}$ . Because $-\tau$ can be substituted for $\tau$ , without loss of generality we can assume $\tau \in \mathbb {H}$ , and then define $\wp (z,\tau ):=\wp (z,1,\tau )$ . With that definition, we have $\wp (z,\omega _{1},\omega _{2})=\omega _{1}^{-2}\wp (z/\omega _{1},\omega _{2}/\omega _{1})$ .

## Properties

- $\wp$ is a meromorphic function with a pole of order 2 at each period $\lambda$ in $\Lambda$ .
- $\wp$ is a homogeneous function in that:

$\wp (\lambda z,\lambda \omega _{1},\lambda \omega _{2})=\lambda ^{-2}\wp (z,\omega _{1},\omega _{2}).$

- $\wp$ is an even function. That means $\wp (z)=\wp (-z)$ for all $z\in \mathbb {C} \setminus \Lambda$ , which can be seen in the following way:

${\begin{aligned}\wp (-z)&={\frac {1}{(-z)^{2}}}+\sum _{\lambda \in \Lambda \setminus \{0\}}\left({\frac {1}{(-z-\lambda )^{2}}}-{\frac {1}{\lambda ^{2}}}\right)\\&={\frac {1}{z^{2}}}+\sum _{\lambda \in \Lambda \setminus \{0\}}\left({\frac {1}{(z+\lambda )^{2}}}-{\frac {1}{\lambda ^{2}}}\right)\\&={\frac {1}{z^{2}}}+\sum _{\lambda \in \Lambda \setminus \{0\}}\left({\frac {1}{(z-\lambda )^{2}}}-{\frac {1}{\lambda ^{2}}}\right)=\wp (z).\end{aligned}}$

The second last equality holds because

${\displaystyle \{-\lambda$

. Since the sum converges absolutely this rearrangement does not change the limit.

- The derivative of $\wp$ is given by: $\wp '(z)=-2\sum _{\lambda \in \Lambda }{\frac {1}{(z-\lambda )^{3}}}.$
- $\wp$ and $\wp '$ are doubly periodic with the periods $\omega _{1}$ and $\omega _{2}$ . This means: ${\begin{aligned}\wp (z+\omega _{1})&=\wp (z)=\wp (z+\omega _{2}),\ {\textrm {and}}\\[3mu]\wp '(z+\omega _{1})&=\wp '(z)=\wp '(z+\omega _{2}).\end{aligned}}$ It follows that $\wp (z+\lambda )=\wp (z)$ and $\wp '(z+\lambda )=\wp '(z)$ for all $\lambda \in \Lambda$ .

## Laurent expansion

Let $r:=\min\{{|\lambda }|:0\neq \lambda \in \Lambda \}$ . Then for $0<|z|<r$ the $\wp$ -function has the following Laurent expansion $\wp (z)={\frac {1}{z^{2}}}+\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }(2n+1)G_{2n+2}z^{2n}$ where $G_{n}=\sum _{0\neq \lambda \in \Lambda }\lambda ^{-n}$ for $n\geq 3$ are so called Eisenstein series.

## Differential equation

Set $g_{2}=60G_{4}$ and $g_{3}=140G_{6}$ . Then the $\wp$ -function satisfies the differential equation $\wp '^{2}(z)=4\wp ^{3}(z)-g_{2}\wp (z)-g_{3}.$ This relation can be verified by forming a linear combination of powers of $\wp$ and $\wp '$ to eliminate the pole at $z=0$ . This yields an entire elliptic function that has to be constant by Liouville's theorem.

### Invariants

The coefficients of the above differential equation $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ are known as the *invariants*. Because they depend on the lattice $\Lambda$ they can be viewed as functions in $\omega _{1}$ and $\omega _{2}$ .

The series expansion suggests that $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ are homogeneous functions of degree $-4$ and $-6$ . That is $g_{2}(\lambda \omega _{1},\lambda \omega _{2})=\lambda ^{-4}g_{2}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2})$ $g_{3}(\lambda \omega _{1},\lambda \omega _{2})=\lambda ^{-6}g_{3}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2})$ for $\lambda \neq 0$ .

If $\omega _{1}$ and $\omega _{2}$ are chosen in such a way that $\operatorname {Im} \left({\tfrac {\omega _{2}}{\omega _{1}}}\right)>0$ , $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ can be interpreted as functions on the upper half-plane $\mathbb {H$ .

Let $\tau ={\tfrac {\omega _{2}}{\omega _{1}}}$ . One has: $g_{2}(1,\tau )=\omega _{1}^{4}g_{2}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2}),$ $g_{3}(1,\tau )=\omega _{1}^{6}g_{3}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2}).$ That means *g*2 and *g*3 are only scaled by doing this. Set $g_{2}(\tau ):=g_{2}(1,\tau )$ and $g_{3}(\tau ):=g_{3}(1,\tau ).$ As functions of $\tau \in \mathbb {H}$ , $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ are so called modular forms.

The Fourier series for $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ are given as follows: $g_{2}(\tau )={\frac {4}{3}}\pi ^{4}\left[1+240\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }\sigma _{3}(k)q^{2k}\right]$ $g_{3}(\tau )={\frac {8}{27}}\pi ^{6}\left[1-504\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }\sigma _{5}(k)q^{2k}\right]$ where $\sigma _{m}(k):=\sum _{d\mid {k}}d^{m}$ is the divisor function and $q=e^{\pi i\tau }$ is the nome.

### Modular discriminant

The *modular discriminant* $\Delta$ is defined as the discriminant of the characteristic polynomial of the differential equation $\wp '^{2}(z)=4\wp ^{3}(z)-g_{2}\wp (z)-g_{3}$ as follows: $\Delta =g_{2}^{3}-27g_{3}^{2}.$ The discriminant is a modular form of weight $12$ . That is, under the action of the modular group, it transforms as $\Delta \left({\frac {a\tau +b}{c\tau +d}}\right)=\left(c\tau +d\right)^{12}\Delta (\tau )$ where $a,b,d,c\in \mathbb {Z}$ with $ad-bc=1$ .

Note that $\Delta =(2\pi )^{12}\eta ^{24}$ where $\eta$ is the Dedekind eta function.

For the Fourier coefficients of $\Delta$ , see Ramanujan tau function.

### The constants *e*1, *e*2 and *e*3

$e_{1}$ , $e_{2}$ and $e_{3}$ are usually used to denote the values of the $\wp$ -function at the half-periods. $e_{1}\equiv \wp \left({\frac {\omega _{1}}{2}}\right)$ $e_{2}\equiv \wp \left({\frac {\omega _{2}}{2}}\right)$ $e_{3}\equiv \wp \left({\frac {\omega _{1}+\omega _{2}}{2}}\right)$ They are pairwise distinct and only depend on the lattice $\Lambda$ and not on its generators.

$e_{1}$ , $e_{2}$ and $e_{3}$ are the roots of the cubic polynomial $4\wp (z)^{3}-g_{2}\wp (z)-g_{3}$ and are related by the equation: $e_{1}+e_{2}+e_{3}=0.$ Because those roots are distinct the discriminant $\Delta$ does not vanish on the upper half plane. Now we can rewrite the differential equation: $\wp '^{2}(z)=4(\wp (z)-e_{1})(\wp (z)-e_{2})(\wp (z)-e_{3}).$ That means the half-periods are zeros of $\wp '$ .

The invariants $g_{2}$ and $g_{3}$ can be expressed in terms of these constants in the following way: $g_{2}=-4(e_{1}e_{2}+e_{1}e_{3}+e_{2}e_{3})$ $g_{3}=4e_{1}e_{2}e_{3}$ $e_{1}$ , $e_{2}$ and $e_{3}$ are related to the modular lambda function: $\lambda (\tau )={\frac {e_{3}-e_{2}}{e_{1}-e_{2}}},\quad \tau ={\frac {\omega _{2}}{\omega _{1}}}.$

## Relation to Jacobi's elliptic functions

For numerical work, it is often convenient to calculate the Weierstrass elliptic function in terms of Jacobi's elliptic functions.

The basic relations are: $\wp (z)=e_{3}+{\frac {e_{1}-e_{3}}{\operatorname {sn} ^{2}w}}=e_{2}+(e_{1}-e_{3}){\frac {\operatorname {dn} ^{2}w}{\operatorname {sn} ^{2}w}}=e_{1}+(e_{1}-e_{3}){\frac {\operatorname {cn} ^{2}w}{\operatorname {sn} ^{2}w}}$ where $e_{1},e_{2}$ and $e_{3}$ are the three roots described above and where the modulus *k* of the Jacobi functions equals $k={\sqrt {\frac {e_{2}-e_{3}}{e_{1}-e_{3}}}}$ and their argument *w* equals $w=z{\sqrt {e_{1}-e_{3}}}.$

## Relation to Jacobi's theta functions

The function $\wp (z,\tau )=\wp (z,1,\omega _{2}/\omega _{1})$ can be represented by Jacobi's theta functions: $\wp (z,\tau )=\left(\pi \theta _{2}(0,q)\theta _{3}(0,q){\frac {\theta _{4}(\pi z,q)}{\theta _{1}(\pi z,q)}}\right)^{2}-{\frac {\pi ^{2}}{3}}\left(\theta _{2}^{4}(0,q)+\theta _{3}^{4}(0,q)\right)$ where $q=e^{\pi i\tau }$ is the nome and $\tau$ is the period ratio $(\tau \in \mathbb {H} )$ . This also provides a very rapid algorithm for computing $\wp (z,\tau )$ .

## Relation to elliptic curves

Consider the embedding of the cubic curve in the complex projective plane

${\bar {C}}_{g_{2},g_{3}}^{\mathbb {C} }=\{(x,y)\in \mathbb {C} ^{2}:y^{2}=4x^{3}-g_{2}x-g_{3}\}\cup \{O\}\subset \mathbb {C} ^{2}\cup \mathbb {P} _{1}(\mathbb {C} )=\mathbb {P} _{2}(\mathbb {C} ).$

where O is a point lying on the line at infinity $\mathbb {P} _{1}(\mathbb {C} )$ . For this cubic there exists no rational parameterization, if $\Delta \neq 0$ . In this case it is also called an elliptic curve. Nevertheless there is a parameterization in homogeneous coordinates that uses the $\wp$ -function and its derivative $\wp '$ :

$\varphi (\wp ,\wp '):\mathbb {C} /\Lambda \to {\bar {C}}_{g_{2},g_{3}}^{\mathbb {C} },\quad z\mapsto {\begin{cases}\left[\wp (z):\wp '(z):1\right]&z\notin \Lambda \\\left[0:1:0\right]\quad &z\in \Lambda \end{cases}}$

Now the map $\varphi$ is bijective and parameterizes the elliptic curve ${\bar {C}}_{g_{2},g_{3}}^{\mathbb {C} }$ .

$\mathbb {C} /\Lambda$ is an abelian group and a topological space, equipped with the quotient topology.

It can be shown that every Weierstrass cubic is given in such a way. That is to say that for every pair $g_{2},g_{3}\in \mathbb {C}$ with $\Delta =g_{2}^{3}-27g_{3}^{2}\neq 0$ there exists a lattice $\mathbb {Z} \omega _{1}+\mathbb {Z} \omega _{2}$ , such that

$g_{2}=g_{2}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2})$ and $g_{3}=g_{3}(\omega _{1},\omega _{2})$ .

The statement that elliptic curves over $\mathbb {Q}$ can be parameterized over $\mathbb {Q}$ , is known as the modularity theorem. This is an important theorem in number theory. It was part of Andrew Wiles' proof (1995) of Fermat's Last Theorem.

## Addition theorem

The addition theorem states that if $z,w,$ and $z+w$ do not belong to $\Lambda$ , then $\det {\begin{bmatrix}1&\wp (z)&\wp '(z)\\1&\wp (w)&\wp '(w)\\1&\wp (z+w)&-\wp '(z+w)\end{bmatrix}}=0.$ This states that the points $P=(\wp (z),\wp '(z)),$ $Q=(\wp (w),\wp '(w)),$ and $R=(\wp (z+w),-\wp '(z+w))$ are collinear, the geometric form of the group law of an elliptic curve.

This can be proven by considering constants $A,B$ such that $\wp '(z)=A\wp (z)+B,\quad \wp '(w)=A\wp (w)+B.$ Then the elliptic function $\wp '(\zeta )-A\wp (\zeta )-B$ has a pole of order three at zero, and therefore three zeros whose sum belongs to $\Lambda$ . Two of the zeros are z and w , and thus the third is congruent to $-z-w$ .

### Alternative form

The addition theorem can be put into the alternative form, for $z,w,z-w,z+w\not \in \Lambda$ : $\wp (z+w)={\frac {1}{4}}\left[{\frac {\wp '(z)-\wp '(w)}{\wp (z)-\wp (w)}}\right]^{2}-\wp (z)-\wp (w).$

As well as the duplication formula: $\wp (2z)={\frac {1}{4}}\left[{\frac {\wp ''(z)}{\wp '(z)}}\right]^{2}-2\wp (z).$

#### Proofs

This can be proven from the addition theorem shown above. The points $P=(\wp (u),\wp '(u)),Q=(\wp (v),\wp '(v)),$ and $R=(\wp (u+v),-\wp '(u+v))$ are collinear and lie on the curve $y^{2}=4x^{3}-g_{2}x-g_{3}$ . The slope of that line is $m={\frac {y_{P}-y_{Q}}{x_{P}-x_{Q}}}={\frac {\wp '(u)-\wp '(v)}{\wp (u)-\wp (v)}}.$ So $x=x_{P}=\wp (u)$ , $x=x_{Q}=\wp (v)$ , and $x=x_{R}=\wp (u+v)$ all satisfy a cubic $(mx+q)^{2}=4x^{3}-g_{2}x-g_{3},$ where q is a constant. This becomes $4x^{3}-m^{2}x^{2}-(2mq+g_{2})x-g_{3}-q^{2}=0.$ Thus $x_{P}+x_{Q}+x_{R}={\frac {m^{2}}{4}}$ which provides the wanted formula $\wp (u+v)+\wp (u)+\wp (v)={\frac {1}{4}}\left[{\frac {\wp '(u)-\wp '(v)}{\wp (u)-\wp (v)}}\right]^{2}.$

A direct proof is as follows. Any elliptic function f can be expressed as: $f(u)=c\prod _{i=1}^{n}{\frac {\sigma (u-a_{i})}{\sigma (u-b_{i})}}\quad c\in \mathbb {C}$ where $\sigma$ is the Weierstrass sigma function and $a_{i},b_{i}$ are the respective zeros and poles in the period parallelogram. Considering the function $\wp (u)-\wp (v)$ as a function of u , we have $\wp (u)-\wp (v)=c{\frac {\sigma (u+v)\sigma (u-v)}{\sigma (u)^{2}}}.$ Multiplying both sides by $u^{2}$ and letting $u\to 0$ , we have $1=-c\sigma (v)^{2}$ , so $c=-{\frac {1}{\sigma (v)^{2}}}\implies \wp (u)-\wp (v)=-{\frac {\sigma (u+v)\sigma (u-v)}{\sigma (u)^{2}\sigma (v)^{2}}}.$

By definition the Weierstrass zeta function: ${\frac {d}{dz}}\ln \sigma (z)=\zeta (z)$ therefore we logarithmically differentiate both sides with respect to u obtaining: ${\frac {\wp '(u)}{\wp (u)-\wp (v)}}=\zeta (u+v)-2\zeta (u)-\zeta (u-v)$ Once again by definition $\zeta '(z)=-\wp (z)$ thus by differentiating once more on both sides and rearranging the terms we obtain $-\wp (u+v)=-\wp (u)+{\frac {1}{2}}{\frac {\wp ''(v)[\wp (u)-\wp (v)]-\wp '(u)[\wp '(u)-\wp '(v)]}{[\wp (u)-\wp (v)]^{2}}}$ Knowing that $\wp ''$ has the following differential equation $2\wp ''=12\wp ^{2}-g_{2}$ and rearranging the terms one gets the wanted formula $\wp (u+v)={\frac {1}{4}}\left[{\frac {\wp '(u)-\wp '(v)}{\wp (u)-\wp (v)}}\right]^{2}-\wp (u)-\wp (v).$

## Typography

The Weierstrass's elliptic function is usually written with a rather special, lower case script letter ℘, which was Weierstrass's own notation introduced in his lectures of 1862–1863. It should not be confused with the normal mathematical script letters P: 𝒫 and 𝓅.

In computing, the letter ℘ is available as `\wp` in TeX. In Unicode the code point is U+2118 ℘ SCRIPT CAPITAL P, with the more correct alias weierstrass elliptic function. In HTML, it can be escaped as `&weierp;` or `&wp;`.

| Preview | ℘ |   |
|---|---|---|
| Unicode name | SCRIPT CAPITAL P / WEIERSTRASS ELLIPTIC FUNCTION |   |
| Encodings | decimal | hex |
| Unicode | 8472 | U+2118 |
| UTF-8 | 226 132 152 | E2 84 98 |
| Numeric character reference | &#8472; | &#x2118; |
| Named character reference | &weierp;, &wp; |   |
