---
title: "1969 in baseball (part 2/3)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1969_in_baseball
domain: bo-belinsky
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: bo belinsky
fetched: 2026-07-07
part: 2/3
---

## Events

### January

- January 2 – In response to major-league owners' continued refusal to increase their contributions to the players' pension fund commensurately with their television broadcast revenues, the Major League Baseball Players Association urges players not to sign any new contracts.
- January 9 – The Chicago Cubs reacquire relief pitcher Ted Abernathy, two-time National League saves leader, sending catcher Bill Plummer, outfielder/first baseman Clarence Jones and minor-league pitcher Kenneth Myette to the Cincinnati Reds for the 35-year-old "submariner".
- January 20
  - The Philadelphia Phillies trade former starting catcher Clay Dalrymple to the Baltimore Orioles for outfielder Ron Stone. Veteran Dalrymple will back up Elrod Hendricks and Andy Etchebarren on three straight American League pennant-winners and one World Series champion.
  - The California Angels trade pitcher Sammy Ellis to the Chicago White Sox for outfielder Bill Voss.
- January 21 – Stan Musial (93.2%, 317 ballots), in his first year of eligibility, and Roy Campanella (79.4%, 270 ballots) are voted into the Hall of Fame by BBWAA members.
- January 22 – The Montreal Expos trade first baseman Donn Clendenon and outfielder Jesús Alou to the Houston Astros for outfielder Rusty Staub. But Clendenon refuses to report because he strongly dislikes Astro manager Harry Walker, who had been his skipper with the Pittsburgh Pirates between 1965 and July 1967. On April 8, the Expos will send pitchers Jack Billingham and Skip Guinn and $100,000 to Houston to replace Clendenon in the trade.
- January 29 – On his first official day as owner of the Washington Senators, Bob Short fires former slugging outfielder Jim Lemon as the club's manager. Washington finished last in the American League with a 65–96 record in 1968, Lemon's only season as pilot. In the coming weeks, Short also will dismiss general manager (GM) George Selkirk and assume Selkirk's former duties himself.

### February

- February 2 – Pitchers Stan Coveleski and Waite Hoyt are voted into the Hall of Fame by the Special Veterans Committee.
- February 4 – Bowie Kuhn, 42, a partner with the National League's law firm, becomes the fifth permanent Commissioner of Baseball following a two-month-long search process. His term will continue through September 30, 1984, and especially be identified with changing player-owner relations and labor strife. Kuhn will be posthumously elected to the Hall of Fame in 2008.
- February 5 – The New York Mets trade catcher/first baseman Greg Goossen to the Seattle Pilots for a "player to be named later (PTBNL)". New York receives outfielder Jim Gosger on June 14 to complete the deal.
- February 12 – The St. Louis Cardinals purchase the contract of outfielder Byron Browne from the Houston Astros.
- February 17 – Spring training opens without 400 players who have decided to boycott it over the pension-fund impasse.
- February 21 – Hall of Fame hitter Ted Williams returns to uniform as manager of the Washington Senators. Enticed by new owner Bob Short, Williams will lead the 1969 Senators to the only winning season they will enjoy in the expansion-era Senators' 11-year lifespan.
- February 25 – The MLBPA's spring training boycott ends when owners accept most of the players' terms.

### March

- March 1 – Mickey Mantle announces his retirement at age 37 with 18 seasons, 2,401 games played, 536 homers, three MVP awards, 20 All-Star selections, seven World Series rings, and 12 American League pennants under his belt. He will elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974.
- March 16 – A plane crash in Maracaibo, Venezuela, kills 155 people, including first baseman Carlos Santeliz, 20, the Venezuelan League Rookie of the Year, who is on his way to the Atlanta Braves' spring training camp. Another fatality is pitcher Látigo Chávez, 21, en route to the San Francisco Giants' camp; he had gone 12–5 with Double-A Waterbury in the Eastern League, including seven shutouts, in 1967, and posted a 1–0 record and 0.00 ERA in three games with San Francisco in September 1968. Pitcher Pablo Torrealba, scheduled to take the ill-fated flight, misses it and takes a later one.
- March 17 – The Atlanta Braves and St. Louis Cardinals announce a one-for-one trade of All-Stars, with the Braves swapping Joe Torre for the Cardinals' Orlando Cepeda. Torre, 28, will convert from catcher to third base and win the 1971 National League Most Valuable Player Award; Cepeda, 31, is only two years removed from his 1967 NL MVP season. Both will become members of the Baseball Hall of Fame, although Torre (a nine-time All-Star and .297 lifetime hitter with 252 homers as a player) will be selected to recognize his managerial career.
- March 21 – Coming out of a one-year retirement, veteran left-hander Johnny Podres, 36, signs as a free agent with the brand-new San Diego Padres. Podres is a familiar figure in Southern California as a former stalwart for the Los Angeles Dodgers, whom he helped win the 1959 and 1963 World Series.
- March 28 – Still filling gaps in their maiden roster, the Padres acquire pitcher Tommie Sisk and catcher Chris Cannizzaro from the Pittsburgh Pirates for infielder Bobby Klaus and outfielder Ron Davis. Sisk will appear in 53 games on the mound and Cannizzaro will start 128 contests behind the plate for San Diego in 1969.
- March 31 – The Baltimore Orioles acquire veteran utility infielder Rutherford "Chico" Salmon from the Seattle Pilots for pitcher Gene Brabender and infielder Gordon Lund.

### April

- April 1 – The American League's two expansion teams make a deal, with the Kansas City Royals acquiring rookie outfielder Lou Piniella from the Seattle Pilots for pitcher John Gelnar and outfielder Steve Whitaker. Upon winning a regular job, Piniella, already 25, becomes the 1969 AL Rookie of the Year and permanently launches a 1,747-game MLB playing career that lasts into 1984.
- April 3 – Bill White, 35, returns to the St. Louis Cardinals when he's traded by the Philadelphia Phillies for infielders Jerry Buchek and Jim Hutto. First baseman White was a team leader who was selected to eight All-Star teams during his prior (1959–1965) tour as a Redbird.
- April 4 – The Cleveland Indians and California Angels swap veteran outfielders, with Cleveland reacquiring Chuck Hinton for former Los Angeles Dodger Lou Johnson. Hinton had appeared in 403 games over three seasons with the Indians between 1965 and 1967.

- April 8
  - At Shea Stadium, Dan McGinn hits the first home run in Montreal Expos history, a solo shot against Tom Seaver. The Expos withstand the New York Mets' four-run, ninth-inning rally to win their first National League game, 11–10.
  - At Anaheim Stadium, Mike Hegan hits the first home run in Seattle Pilots history, a two-run shot against Jim McGlothlin. The Pilots score four first inning runs and make them stand up for a 4–3 victory in their maiden AL contest.
  - At San Diego Stadium, Ed Spiezio hits the first home run in San Diego Padres history, a solo shot against Don Wilson of the Houston Astros. Spiezio's fifth-inning blow ties the Padres' first-ever NL game at one, and they'll push over winning run in the next frame. Dick Selma throws a five-hit complete game for the 2–1 triumph.
  - At Municipal Stadium, the Kansas City Royals, in their inaugural game, defeat the Minnesota Twins 4–3 in 12 innings. Two pitching stars on the Baltimore Orioles team that won the 1966 World Series pitch for the Royals in this game: Wally Bunker throws the very first pitch, and Moe Drabowsky wins the game in relief. The Royals' first batter, Lou Piniella, gets the first hit for the franchise, leading off the game with a double, and scores their first run on Jerry Adair's single one batter later.
  - At Wrigley Field, the Chicago Cubs open their wild 1969 season in dramatic fashion, as Willie Smith smacks a pinch-hit, two-run, walk-off home run in the bottom of the 11th inning to defeat the Philadelphia Phillies 7–6.
- April 9 – The Cubs' Billy Williams hits four consecutive doubles to tie the Major League record during an 11–3 win over the visiting Phillies. Chicago scores seven runs in the seventh inning.
- April 10 – At Shea Stadium, Tommie Agee of the New York Mets hits a tremendous home run halfway up in the left field upper deck, a feat that will never matched in the stadium's 45-year history.
- April 11 – Seattle successfully inaugurates Major League Baseball at Sick's Stadium‚ as pitcher Gary Bell defeats the Chicago White Sox 7–0. The Seattle Pilots attract 17‚850 today and will draw just 678‚000 for the season. U.S. Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson throws out the first ball and will do the same in the Seattle Mariners opener‚ in 1977.
- April 12 – At Detroit, the Yankees' Mel Stottlemyre allows just one hit, a fourth-inning double to Jim Northrup, and beats Denny McLain and the Detroit Tigers 4–0. For the third time in two years, Northrup saves the Tigers from being the victims of a no-hitter.
- April 13 – At the Oakland–Alameda County Coliseum, Mike Fiore hits the first home run in Kansas City Royals history, a solo shot against Blue Moon Odom.
- April 14 – In their home opener, the Montreal Expos host Canada's first major-league game, and emerge with an 8–7 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals, led by Mack Jones' first-inning three-run homer and Dan McGinn's stellar relief effort. A crowd of 29,184 pack *Stade Parc Jarry* (official capacity: 28,000), the smallest ballpark in the majors.
- April 15 – San Francisco Giants manager Clyde King orders seven intentional walks to be issued to Cincinnati Reds hitters in a 12-inning, 11–10 loss at Crosley Field.
- April 17
  - At Connie Mack Stadium, Bill Stoneman of the Montreal Expos no-hits the Philadelphia Phillies 7–0. The game is only the ninth in Expos history, and only the fifth start in Stoneman's Major League career. Stoneman walks five and fans eight.
  - Five days after he drops a 5–1 decision to Juan Marichal in his first and only start with the San Diego Padres, veteran right-hander Al McBean, 30, is traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers for pitcher Leon Everitt and shortstop Tommy Dean.
- April 18 – After six years of inactivity, the Triple-A American Association is reborn in the Western and Midwestern United States. With six clubs—Denver, Indianapolis, Oklahoma City and Tulsa, which transfer from the Pacific Coast League, and two startup franchises, Des Moines and Omaha—the Association is revived as MLB's two leagues expand to 24 teams and divisional play. It will add Evansville and Wichita in 1970, to join the PCL and International League as eight-team, Triple-A circuits.
- April 19 – The Boston Red Sox trade outfielder Ken Harrelson, the reigning American League RBI champion, to the Cleveland Indians with pitchers Juan Pizarro and Dick Ellsworth for pitchers Vicente Romo and Sonny Siebert and catcher Joe Azcue; a stunned Harrelson, however, refuses to report to Cleveland, citing his extensive business interests in Boston. After meetings with general manager Gabe Paul and manager Alvin Dark, Harrelson relents and joins the Indian lineup on April 24 against the New York Yankees at Cleveland Stadium.
- April 25 – The Chicago Cubs trade pitchers Joe Niekro and Gary Ross and shortstop Francisco Libran to the San Diego Padres for right-hander Dick Selma.
- April 27 – The Washington Senators score six runs in the fourth inning—highlighted by pitcher Frank Bertaina's three-run homer—and make those runs stand up in a 6–5 triumph over the Cleveland Indians at Cleveland Municipal Stadium. The Indians, a first division team in 1968, have lost 15 of their first 16 games of 1969.
- April 30 – Cincinnati Reds fireballer Jim Maloney throws his second career no-hitter, blanking the Houston Astros 10–0 at Crosley Field. Maloney walks five and fans 13.

### May

- May 1
  - The Houston Astros, held hitless the day before by Jim Maloney, answer back as Don Wilson pitches *his* second career no-hitter, a 4–0 victory over the Cincinnati Reds; he also notches with 13 strikeouts. On defense, Houston ties a National League record with just one assist. The back-to-back no-hitters are only the second in MLB history, the feat having been accomplished just the year before by Gaylord Perry and Ray Washburn.
  - Al López, 60, hands over the managerial reins of the Chicago White Sox (8–9 in 1969) to Don Gutteridge, a longtime coach. His retirement gives López a career record of 1,410–1,004 (.584) with two American League pennants in 17 seasons as skipper of the Cleveland Indians (1951–1956) and the White Sox (1957–1965, 1968–1969). That record, plus his 1,919 games caught over 19 seasons as one of MLB's premier catchers of the 1930s and 1940s, earns López a 1977 berth in the Baseball Hall of Fame.
- May 2 – There's a one-hitter in the American League: Dick Bosman of the Washington Senators allows only a second-inning single to the Cleveland Indians' Tony Horton in a 5–0 triumph at RFK Stadium. Ted Williams' surprising Senators are now 14–11 and in second place in the AL East. Bosman will throw a no-hitter as a member of the Indians on July 19, 1974.
- May 4 – At Anaheim Stadium, in only the 25th game in Kansas City Royals history, Bob Oliver goes 6-for-6 with a home run and a double in the Royals' 15–1 drubbing of the California Angels. Oliver becomes the first player to collect six hits in one game since Jesús Alou did so for the San Francisco Giants on July 10, 1964, and the first American League player to do so since Floyd Robinson with the Chicago White Sox on July 22, 1962.
- May 12 – Bob Gibson of the St. Louis Cardinals becomes the seventh pitcher in National League history to strike out the side on nine pitches, his victims being Len Gabrielson, Paul Popovich and John Miller in the seventh inning of a game against the Los Angeles Dodgers. Gibson enjoys his feat as part of a 6–2 victory for St. Louis.
- May 13 – Ernie Banks of the Chicago Cubs reaches the 1,500 runs batted in milestone while driving in seven runs in a 19–0 shellacking of the expansion San Diego Padres. Hard-throwing right-hander Dick Selma earns the victory as the Cubs tie a modern-day record for the most one-sided shutout in National League history.
- May 15 – Dave McNally of the Baltimore Orioles one-hits the Minnesota Twins and defeats fellow southpaw Jim Kaat at Metropolitan Stadium, 5–0. César Tovar spoils the no-hitter with a one-out, ninth-inning single.
- May 16 – At Fenway Park, the Seattle Pilots and Boston Red Sox score a combined 11 runs in the 11th inning, as Seattle hangs on to win, 10–9. The Pilots slug three homers (by John Kennedy, Tommy Harper and Wayne Comer) in the visitors' half of the frame to take a 10–4 lead in the extra-innings contest, then withstand a five-run Bosox comeback to hold on. Reliever Jim Bouton, now a knuckleball artist, throws three hitless, shutout innings to gain his first victory as a Pilot.
- May 18 – Tying a major league record, the Minnesota Twins steal five bases in the third inning against the Detroit Tigers' battery of Mickey Lolich and Bill Freehan. Four of the steals occur during a single Harmon Killebrew at-bat, and two of the steals, by César Tovar and Rod Carew, are of home plate.
- May 20 – The New York Yankees acquire former American League saves leader Jack Aker from the Seattle Pilots for right-hander Fred Talbot.
- May 26 – In the throes of a ten-game losing streak, and sitting in last place in the AL West at 11–28, the California Angels fire Bill Rigney, the only manager the team has had since its debut in 1961. Lefty Phillips, former pitching coach of the Los Angeles Dodgers, replaces him.

### June

- June 4 – Jack DiLauro, Tug McGraw and Ron Taylor combine for 15 shutout innings, as their New York Mets squeeze out a 1–0 victory at Shea Stadium against the Los Angeles Dodgers. The winning run is unearned, when centerfielder Willie Davis' error enables Tommie Agee to score from first base.
- June 5 – Jeff Burroughs (Washington Senators) and J. R. Richard (Houston Astros) are the top two selections in the 1969 June amateur draft. With the 55th pick overall, the Minnesota Twins pluck a future Hall of Famer, Bert Blyleven, out of the draft pool in the third round.
- June 8 – At Los Angeles, the first-year Montreal Expos hold off the hometown Dodgers 4–3, to end their 20-game losing streak. The Expos, now 12–37 (.245), have been winless since May 10. Rusty Staub and Mack Jones hit home runs, and 41-year-old reliever Roy Face quells a ninth-inning Dodger rally to preserve starter Jerry Robertson's victory. The Expos' 20-game skid is tied for fourth-most, all time (through 2024).
- June 11
  - Maury Wills returns to the city and team of his breakthrough stardom (1959–1966), when the Montreal Expos send him to the Los Angeles Dodgers with ace pinch hitter Manny Mota for first baseman Ron Fairly and utility infielder Paul Popovich. Wills, 36, will regain his old shortstop job through 1971 and steal 69 bases in 456 games in his second Dodger tour, which ends October 4, 1972.
  - The Expos immediately deal Popovich to his original team, the Chicago Cubs, in exchange for pitcher Jack Lamabe and outfielder Adolfo Phillips.
  - Joe Lahoud, second-year Boston Red Sox outfielder, clouts three home runs (his first long balls of 1969) in a 13–5 rout of the Minnesota Twins at Metropolitan Stadium.
- June 13
  - The New York Mets sell the contract of veteran left-hander Al Jackson to the Cincinnati Reds. Jackson has posted a poor 10.64 ERA, with 18 hits allowed in only 11 innings, in nine games during 1969, and the transaction means that this "Original Met", now 33, will not be a part of the "Miracle Mets'" historic pennant drive and postseason success to come.
  - The Atlanta Braves, currently holding first place in the NL West by a single game, obtain veteran outfielder Tony González from the San Diego Padres for catcher Walt Hriniak, third baseman Van Kelly and outfield prospect Andy Finlay. González, 32, will start 76 games in left- and centerfield for the Braves through the rest of the regular season and bat .357 in 14 at bats during the 1969 NLCS.
- June 14
  - At Fenway Park, the Oakland Athletics lash 25 hits, most by a team in 1969, and put up three separate five-run innings in a 21–7 beat down of the Boston Red Sox. The 21 runs also set an MLB standard for this season. Young Oakland outfielder Reggie Jackson goes five for six, including his 21st and 22nd homers of the season, and knocks in ten runs, most by anyone in a 1969 game.
  - The New York Yankees cut ties with 1962 AL Rookie of the Year Tom Tresh, sending the 30-year-old outfielder to his home-state Detroit Tigers for fellow outfielder Ron Woods.
- June 15
  - The Montreal Expos deal first baseman Donn Clendenon to the New York Mets in exchange for pitcher Steve Renko, infielder Kevin Collins, two minor-league pitchers (Jay Carden and David Colon), and a "player to be named later" (third base prospect Terry Dailey). Clendenon will be selected MVP of the 1969 World Series.
  - The Boston Red Sox trade unhappy catcher Joe Azcue to the California Angels for fellow backstop Tom Satriano.
- June 19 – Chicago Cubs manager Leo Durocher, 63, weds for the fourth time, marrying 40-year-old Lynne Walker Goldblatt.
- June 21 – The Minnesota Twins and Oakland Athletics enter the tenth inning tied 3–3, then the Twins, keyed by a Harmon Killebrew homer, score 11 runs in the top of the inning, and beat Oakland 14–4. Minnesota's 11-run outburst equals a record set by the 1928 New York Yankees.
- June 22 – The Cubs score four runs in the ninth inning to defeat the Montreal Expos 7–6 in the first game of a doubleheader at Wrigley Field. The decisive blow is Jim Hickman's two-run walk-off homer.
- June 26 – Jim Hickman's home run in the tenth inning defeats the Pittsburgh Pirates 7–5 at Wrigley Field. On the spur of the moment Ron Santo leaped in the air and clicked his heels 3 times on the way to the clubhouse. The victory dance became a hit with euphoric Cub fans.

### July

- July 4 – At the customary half-way point in MLB's first four-division season, the Chicago Cubs (52–28) lead the surprising New York Mets (44–34) by seven games in the National League East; the Atlanta Braves (47–32) lead the Los Angeles Dodgers (45–32) by a game in the NL West; the rampaging Baltimore Orioles (55–24) enjoy a ten-game advantage over the defending world-champion Detroit Tigers (43–32) in the American League East; and the Oakland Athletics (44–34) and Minnesota Twins (42–32) are in a two-team race, virtually tied for the top spot in the AL West.
- July 8 – With three runs in the ninth inning, the New York Mets beat the Chicago Cubs 4–3, cutting Chicago's lead in the National League East to four games. Chicago's Ron Santo rips into center fielder Don Young for two misplays in the outfield; Santo apologizes the next day for criticizing Young, who had left early and didn't take the team bus. Santo is later booed in his first game back at Wrigley Field.
- July 9 – With one out in the ninth inning, the Chicago Cubs' Jim Qualls lines a single to left center to break up Tom Seaver's perfect game bid. The New York Mets' 4–0 victory over the Cubs at Shea Stadium would go down in history as "Tom Seaver's Imperfect Game".
- July 13 – In the third meeting between the two brothers, the San Diego Padres' Joe Niekro defeats Phil Niekro of the Atlanta Braves, 1–0. The triumph gives Joe a 2–1 record over his Cooperstown-bound elder brother.
- July 17 – Jim Kaat improves to 10–6 with an 8–5 victory for the Minnesota Twins over the Chicago White Sox despite committing three errors. The Hall-of-Fame southpaw is in the midst of a streak of 16 consecutive Gold Glove Awards for his fielding (1962–1977).
- July 23 – At R.F.K. Memorial Stadium, Willie McCovey hits two home runs as the National League beats the American League 9–3, for its seventh straight All-Star Game win. McCovey is named MVP, with his two homers tying an All-Star Game record set by Arky Vaughan (1941), Ted Williams (1946) and Al Rosen (1954). The game is postponed by one day after heavy rains in the Washington, D.C. area. When the AL's Don Mincher pinch-hit in the fourth inning, he became a trivia answer: the only Seattle Pilot to appear in an All-Star game.
- July 26 – Randy Hundley drives in all three Cub runs, including a walk-off single in the 11th inning, to lead the Cubs to a 3–2 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers at Wrigley Field.
- July 27
  - The year's longest MLB game, by innings, takes place at Sick's Stadium, when the Boston Red Sox and host Seattle Pilots struggle for 20 innings until Boston comes out with a 5–3 victory. The game is 1–1 through 18, then each team scores a run in the 19th. Ultimately, in the 20th, Joe Lahoud's two-run homer off Bob Locker decides matters. The two teams use a total of 15 pitchers.
  - In the most one-sided shutout in Baltimore Orioles history, the Os defeat the Chicago White Sox, 17–0, at Memorial Stadium. Jim Hardin pitches a two-hit shutout, walking none, and hits a three-run home run in the bottom of the fourth off of Gary Bell to make it 13–0. The Orioles will plate four more runs and belt out 20 hits. Bobby Knoop has both hits for the White Sox. Hardin retires the last 20 batters in a row that he faces. In Baltimore's 100th game of the season, they are 69–31 and lead the Detroit Tigers by 12½ games in the newly formed American League East.
- July 29 – Willie McCovey hits his 300th career home run helping the San Francisco Giants beat the Chicago Cubs, 4–2.
- July 30 – After losing the first game of a doubleheader with the Houston Astros 16–3 at Shea Stadium, the New York Mets trail 7–0 in the third inning of the nightcap when Houston's Johnny Edwards gets a base hit to left field. Outfielder Cleon Jones, an All-Star who will hit .340 in 1969, is slow to retrieve the ball and then makes a "lackadaisical" throw (according to Retrosheet) back to the infield. The result is a double that makes the score 8–0. Mets manager Gil Hodges emerges from the dugout, walks past Nolan Ryan on the mound and all the way to left field to confer with Jones. Then Hodges returns to the dugout, with Jones following a few paces behind him, and replaces Jones in left with Ron Swoboda. Jones will be kept out of the lineup for the next two games and used only as a pinch hitter in the two contests after that. Newspapers report that Jones was benched for failure to hustle, with Hodges deciding to do so publicly to show that he will not tolerate lack of effort on his team, even from its star player.

### August

- August 1 – Willie Davis of the Los Angeles Dodgers begins his 31-game hit streak. Coming into today's game against the St. Louis Cardinals at Busch Memorial Stadium, Davis is hitting .260 — but by the time the streak ends on September 4 Willie's average is .318. He hits .459 during the streak and breaks the Dodgers' franchise record of 29 games set by Zack Wheat. The 31-game hit streak is the third-longest in National League history and as of 2023 remains the Dodgers' record.
- August 5 – The Pittsburgh Pirates' Willie Stargell hits the first home run completely out of Dodger Stadium. Los Angeles pitcher Alan Foster surrenders the 506-foot blast. To date, it's the longest home run in Dodger Stadium history. (Stargell will hit another homer out of Dodger Stadium, off Andy Messersmith in 1973.) The mammoth home run comes in the seventh inning and breaks a 3–3 tie, a three-run home run by Andy Kosco having tied the game for the Dodgers in the bottom of the sixth; Pittsburgh scores seven more runs in the ninth inning and defeats Los Angeles 11–3.
- August 6
  - Minnesota Twins manager Billy Martin throws a punch that knocks out one of his starting pitchers, Dave Boswell, in an alley behind a Detroit bar. Martin claims he's breaking up an altercation between Boswell and Twins outfielder Bob Allison; the pitcher says Martin is the instigator. Minnesota is 78–62 and leads the AL West by three games; Boswell is 12–9 (3.45) in 26 starts. Boswell demands a meeting with club owner Calvin Griffith to clear the air before he returns to action August 18. He will go 8–3 the rest of the way, with his 20 victories helping the Twins win their division. Martin will be fired after the club is swept in the 1969 ALCS.
  - The Philadelphia Phillies (44–64 and fifth in the six-team National League East), fire second-year manager Bob Skinner. Coach George Myatt takes over on an interim basis through season's end.
- August 10
  - Citing damage to his right shoulder, Don Drysdale retires from the Los Angeles Dodgers. The future Hall of Famer is 33 and has a 5–4 record with a 4.45 earned run average in 12 starts this season, and he will retire with a 209–166 (2.95) career mark. He is the last player still playing for the Dodgers who also played in Brooklyn.
  - At Baltimore, the Orioles' Mike Cuellar allows only one hit, a top-of-the-ninth single to César Tovar, and beats the Minnesota Twins 2–0. For the second time this season, Tovar saves the Twins from being no-hit against Baltimore. He broke up a no-hitter by Dave McNally in the ninth inning during a game in May.
- August 13
  - Montreal reliever Roy Face gives up the last of his record 21 extra-inning home runs, an 11th-inning grand slam to the Cincinnati Reds' Johnny Bench. Cincinnati wins 8–3 in Montreal.
  - Only four days after coming off the disabled list, Jim Palmer of the Baltimore Orioles no-hits the Oakland Athletics 8–0 at Memorial Stadium. The home plate umpire is Lou DiMuro, whose son Mike would call balls and strikes for Roy Halladay's perfect game May 29, 2010.
- August 14 – In the National League East Division, the Chicago Cubs lead the St. Louis Cardinals by 8½ games and the New York Mets by 9½ games.
- August 15 – The Los Angeles Dodgers acquire starting pitcher Jim Bunning, 37, from the Pittsburgh Pirates for infielder Chuck Goggin, minor-league outfielder Ron Mitchell, and cash. Two games out of first place in a five-team NL West divisional race, the Dodgers hope that future Hall-of-Famer Bunning will bolster a rotation recently depleted by the retirement of Don Drysdale.
- August 19 – At Wrigley Field, Ken Holtzman of the Chicago Cubs no-hits the Atlanta Braves 3–0 with no strikeouts. Only one other pitcher in major league history, Sad Sam Jones in 1923, has hurled a no-hitter without the benefit of a strikeout. Holtzman survives a scare in the seventh as Hank Aaron's fly ball to deep left field leading off the inning appears to be going over the wall for a home run; however, a stiff wind cuts into the ball and enables Billy Williams to catch it at the warning track. Aaron grounds out to Cubs' second baseman Glenn Beckert for the game's final out.
- August 30 – The Houston Astros, four games out of first place in the NL West's furious divisional scramble, make their second trade in six days with the Seattle Pilots, obtaining hard-hitting Tommy Davis, 30, a two-time former NL batting champion, for fellow outfielders Sandy Valdespino and Danny Walton. On August 24, Houston had picked up relief pitcher Jim Bouton, 30, from Seattle for pitchers Roric Harrison and Dooley Womack. Bouton is secretly working on a diary/memoir of his season, to be published in 1970 as *Ball Four.*

### September

- September 1 – Labor Day action concludes in MLB's first season of divisional play, and there are three pennant races. In the National League West, only 5½ games separate five teams: the San Francisco Giants (75–59) lead the Cincinnati Reds (72–57) and Los Angeles Dodgers (73–58) by a half game, with the Atlanta Braves (73–63) three games out and Houston Astros (69–64) still in the fight. In the NL East, the Chicago Cubs (82–52) are maintaining their top spot, with the New York Mets (76–55) 4½ back. The AL West sees the Minnesota Twins (80–52) holding a 5½-game advantage over the Oakland Athletics (74–57). The only noncompetitive division is the AL East, where the Baltimore Orioles (92–43) have cruised to a 13-game margin over the Detroit Tigers (78–55).
- September 8 – The Atlanta Braves bolster their pitching staff for the stretch run, acquiring future Hall-of-Famer Hoyt Wilhelm, 47, and Bob Priddy, 29, from the California Angels for two prospects, southpaw Clint Compton, 19, and outfielder Mickey Rivers, 20.
- September 8–9 – The tide turns in the National League East race during a dramatic two-game showdown between the second-place New York Mets and front-running Chicago Cubs at Shea Stadium.
  - On September 8, Cubs starter Bill Hands knocks down Mets' leadoff batter Tommie Agee in the first inning. Jerry Koosman hits the next Cub he faces, Ron Santo, in the hand. Agee hits a two-run home run in the third, and the Mets win 3–2, cutting the Cubbies' division lead to 1½ games.
  - On September 9, the Mets ride Tom Seaver's 21st victory and 14th complete game to 7–1 triumph over the Cubs and trim Chicago's edge to only a half-game; in the fourth inning, a black cat jumps on the field and runs past Santo in the on-deck circle.
- September 10 – A loss by the Cubs—to the Philadelphia Phillies, 6–2, at Connie Mack Stadium—and a doubleheader sweep by the Mets—over the visiting Montreal Expos by 3–2 and 6–1 scores—propel the New Yorkers into first place in the NL East, a lead they will not relinquish through the end of the regular season.
- September 15 – The St. Louis Cardinals' Steve Carlton strikes out a record 19 New York Mets, but Carlton loses the game 4–3 at Busch Stadium. New York's division lead is now 4½ games.
- September 18 – Despite leading the Oakland Athletics to an 80–69 record, the franchise's best showing in 21 years, manager Hank Bauer is replaced by John McNamara at the team's helm. It is owner Charles O. Finley's ninth managerial change in nine years, and Bauer's second enforced departure from the job (he had skippered Finley's Athletics from June 19, 1961 through 1962).
- September 20 – At Shea Stadium, Bob Moose of the Pittsburgh Pirates no-hits the New York Mets 4–0.
- September 21 – At Candlestick Park, the San Francisco Giants defeat the Los Angeles Dodgers 4–3 in 10 innings as Maury Wills commits an error on Jim Davenport's ground ball, allowing Willie McCovey to score the winning run. Ironically, this game marks Dodger Bill Buckner's major league debut; Buckner, who grounds out to second baseman Ron Hunt while pinch-hitting for pitcher Jim Brewer in the ninth inning, will become well known for Mookie Wilson's ground ball going through his legs in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series.
- September 22
  - Willie Mays hits his 600th career home run helping the San Francisco Giants beat the San Diego Padres 4–2.
  - The Minnesota Twins survive a ninth-inning scare to beat the Kansas City Royals 4–3 and clinch the AL West title on Harmon Killebrew's 47th home run and César Tovar's two run-scoring singles.
- September 23 – Dick Williams is fired as manager of the Boston Red Sox less than two years after leading them to their 1967 "Impossible Dream" pennant. The 1969 Red Sox are 82–71, third in the American League East, and 24 games behind Baltimore. Coach Eddie Popowski becomes temporary pilot. Later today, Carl Yastrzemski hits his 200th career home run, helping the Red Sox beat the New York Yankees 8–3.
- September 24 – After seven losing seasons, the eight-year-old New York Mets clinch the National League East Division title as Donn Clendenon hits two home runs in a 6–0 win over Steve Carlton and the St. Louis Cardinals. The Mets will go 39–11 from August 14 through October 2, 1969; the Cubs, 18–27 over the same span, will finish eight games behind the Mets, and not win the division until exactly 15 years from this day.
- September 25 – The Pittsburgh Pirates (84–73 and third in the NL East) dismiss their second-year manager, Larry Shepard. Coach Alex Grammas takes the helm as temporary skipper for the season's final five games.
- September 26 – Veteran minor leaguer Frank Lucchesi is appointed manager of the 1970 Philadelphia Phillies. Lucchesi, 43, is promoted to his first MLB job after developing players for 14 years in the Phils' farm system, and winning a division title with the Triple-A Eugene Emeralds of the Pacific Coast League.
- September 30 – The Atlanta Braves (98–62) clinch the 1969 NL West championship when they defeat the Cincinnati Reds 3–2 before a home crowd of 43,974. Phil Niekro improves to 23–13, as the Braves clinch their first postseason berth since 1958, and first since moving to Georgia in 1966.

### October

- October 1 – Ted Williams' debut season as manager of the Washington Senators ends on a triumphant note when Washington defeats Williams' longtime team, the Boston Red Sox, 3–2 behind Joe Coleman Jr., a Massachusetts native, at RFK Stadium. The 86–76 Senators finish fourth in the AL East, one game behind the Red Sox, but it is the most successful season in the nine-year-old expansion team's history.
- October 2 – The Seattle Pilots finish what will be their only season in the Emerald City with a 3–1 loss to the Oakland Athletics at Sick's Stadium. The city of Seattle would not host another MLB team until the birth of the Mariners in 1977.
- October 4 – The American League and National League Championship Series begin, the first such series to feature the respective leagues' division champions. The Baltimore Orioles will sweep the Minnesota Twins in three games for the AL pennant; the New York Mets will do the same against the Atlanta Braves for the NL crown.
- October 7 – The St. Louis Cardinals trade Curt Flood to the Philadelphia Phillies in a seven-player deal that also sends Tim McCarver, Byron Browne and Joe Hoerner to the Phillies and Dick Allen, Cookie Rojas and Jerry Johnson to the Cardinals. Flood, however, refuses to report to the Phillies and instead challenges baseball's reserve clause in a lawsuit that eventually reaches the Supreme Court. He will sit out the entire 1970 season.
- October 8 – After firing Dave Bristol as manager despite an 89–73 season, the Cincinnati Reds hire Sparky Anderson to replace him. During the next seven seasons, Anderson, who will make his major league managerial debut in 1970, will guide the team known as the "Big Red Machine" to five National League West titles, four National League pennants, and back-to-back World Series titles in 1975 and 1976.
- October 9 – The Pittsburgh Pirates rehire Danny Murtaugh as their manager for what will be his third of four terms as Pirates skipper. This stint will see the Pirates win the 1970 National League East title for their first postseason berth since winning the 1960 World Series (with Murtaugh at the helm), as well as winning the 1971 World Series.
- October 13 – In the first of many firings in his career, Minnesota Twins manager Billy Martin is sacked by owner Calvin Griffith after his Twins are swept in the American League Championship Series. The Twins also release two veterans, relief pitcher Al Worthington, 40, and catcher and 1969 AL All-Star John Roseboro, 36.
- October 15 – Baltimore Orioles manager Earl Weaver is warned during Game 4 of the 1969 World Series by umpire Shag Crawford not to argue balls and strikes. After receiving this warning, Weaver follows Crawford to home plate, and immediately is ejected. The Mets would win 2–1 in 10 innings for a 3–1 lead in the World Series.
- October 16 – The Baltimore Orioles are ahead 3–0 in Game 5 of the World Series at Shea Stadium when Dave McNally strikes New York Mets batter Cleon Jones in the foot with a pitch. However, home plate umpire Lou DiMuro ruled that the ball missed Jones. Mets manager Gil Hodges emerges from the dugout to argue and shows DiMuro the shoe-polish-smudged ball. DiMuro reverses his call, and awards Jones first base. The following batter, Donn Clendenon, hits a two-run home run to pull the Mets within a run of Baltimore. (The homer is Clendenon's third of the Series). Following an Al Weis solo home run in the seventh to tie the game, the Mets score two in the eighth for a 5–3 lead. Jerry Koosman pitches a complete game for the Mets, who win the World Series in five games. Clendenon is named World Series MVP.
- October 21 – The St. Louis Cardinals trade pitcher Dave Giusti and catcher Dave Ricketts to the Pittsburgh Pirates for catcher/outfielder Carl Taylor and minor-league outfielder Frank Vanzin.
- October 29 – Right-hander Jim Bunning returns to the Philadelphia Phillies as a free agent after being released one week earlier by the Los Angeles Dodgers. Bunning, 38, had gone 74–46 for the Phils between 1964 and 1967.

### November

- November 5 – Two right-handed pitchers change teams when the Cincinnati Reds trade George Culver to the St. Louis Cardinals for Ray Washburn.
- November 12 – Harmon Killebrew of the Minnesota Twins is voted the American League's Most Valuable Player after he led the league with 49 home runs, 140 RBI, and a .430 on-base percentage.
- November 17 – The Philadelphia Phillies deal outfielder Johnny Callison, 30, a four-time former NL All-Star, and pitcher Larry Colton ("PTBNL") to the Chicago Cubs for pitcher Dick Selma and outfielder Oscar Gamble.
- November 20 – Willie McCovey of the San Francisco Giants is voted National League Most Valuable Player after he led the league with 45 home runs, 126 RBI, and a .453 on-base percentage and .656 slugging percentage.
- November 21 – The Cleveland Indians send José Cardenal to the St. Louis Cardinals for fellow outfielder Vada Pinson.
- November 24 – A busy offseason of managerial changes in the American League concludes when Dave Bristol, fired by the Cincinnati Reds in October, replaces Joe Schultz at the helm of the Seattle Pilots; earlier, Eddie Kasko was named Dick Williams' permanent successor with the Boston Red Sox (October 2); Charlie Metro replaced Joe Gordon with the Kansas City Royals (October 8); and Bill Rigney, dismissed by the California Angels in May, took over the Minnesota Twins (October 22, nine days after Billy Martin's firing). Oakland owner Charles O. Finley didn't wait for the off-season, having switched pilots September 18.
- November 25
  - Kansas City Royals outfielder Lou Piniella, who hit .282 with 11 home runs and 68 RBI, is named American League Rookie of the Year over pitcher Mike Nagy (12–2, 3.11 ERA), outfielder Carlos May (.281, 18, 62) and pitcher Ken Tatum (7–2, 1.36).
  - The Cincinnati Reds trade hard-hitting outfielder Alex Johnson (.315, 17 HR, 88 RBI) and utility infielder Chico Ruiz to the California Angels for pitchers Pedro Borbón, Vern Geishert and Jim McGlothlin. Johnson will win the 1970 American League batting title (.329) but, in 1971, frequent clashes with Angel management lead to a long suspension, a successful arbitration case, and his trade from the team.
- November 28 – Second baseman Ted Sizemore becomes the seventh Dodgers player to be named the NL Rookie of the Year. Sizemore joins Jackie Robinson (1947), Don Newcombe (1949), Joe Black (1952), Junior Gilliam (1953), Frank Howard (1960) and Jim Lefebvre (1965).

### December

- December 3
  - The Kansas City Royals acquire future five-time American League All-Star and 3x Gold Glove Award winning centerfielder Amos Otis, 22, and pitcher Bob Johnson from the New York Mets for third baseman Joe Foy.
  - The Atlanta Braves trade veteran outfielder Felipe Alou to the Oakland Athletics for pitcher Jim Nash.
  - The Montreal Expos acquire veteran hurler Joe Sparma from the Detroit Tigers for fellow right-hander Jerry Robertson.
- December 4
  - Chub Feeney, San Francisco Giants' vice president, succeeds retiring Warren Giles as president of the National League.
  - The Detroit Tigers send pitcher Pat Dobson and infielder Dave Campbell to the San Diego Padres for pitcher Joe Niekro.
  - The New York Yankees deal first baseman Joe Pepitone, a seven-year veteran and holdover from the Bombers' early-decade glory days, to the Houston Astros for outfielder/first baseman Curt Blefary.
  - The Montreal Expos obtain center-fielder Boots Day from the St. Louis Cardinals for southpaw Rich Nye.
  - Well-traveled left-hander George Brunet packs his bags again when the Seattle Pilots trade him to the Washington Senators for righty reliever Dave Baldwin. Brunet's 30-year Organized Baseball career will include service with 35 teams, including nine MLB clubs.
- December 5
  - The New York Yankees trade left-handed hurler Al Downing and catcher Frank Fernández to the Oakland Athletics for infielders Danny Cater and Ossie Chavarría.
  - The Athletics also purchase the contract of Mudcat Grant from the St. Louis Cardinals. Grant, 34, is in the process of converting from a successful starting pitcher to an effective reliever.
  - The San Diego Padres trade right-hander Frank Reberger to the San Francisco Giants for pitcher Ron Herbel, catcher Bob Barton and third baseman Bobby Etheridge.
  - Five players change teams when the Cleveland Indians send hurlers Ron Law and Horacio Piña, and infielder Dave Nelson, to the Washington Senators for pitchers Dennis Higgins and Barry Moore.
- December 6 – The MLB Restructuring Committee issues its recommendations, which include strengthening the office of the Commissioner of Baseball, reducing the power of the league presidents, adopting interleague play, combining the umpire staffs of each circuit, and standardizing league rules to make them consistent. It will take decades for each recommendation to be implemented, and MLB rules will not be made consistent until 2023, when the National League adopts the designated hitter rule, which debuted in the American League in 1973.
- December 7 – The Seattle Pilots send pitcher Diego Segui and shortstop Ray Oyler to the Oakland Athletics for right-hander George Lauzerique and infielder Ted Kubiak.
- December 10 – The Minnesota Twins deal former 20-game-winner and 1964 Cy Young Award recipient Dean Chance, fellow right-hander Bob Miller, third baseman Graig Nettles and outfielder Ted Uhlaender to the Cleveland Indians for former 20-game-winner and 1968 earned run average leader Luis Tiant and another pitcher, Stan Williams.
- December 12
  - The New York Mets send infielder Bob Heise and outfielder Jim Gosger to the San Francisco Giants for pitcher Ray Sadecki and outfielder Dave Marshall.
  - The Giants also send right-hander Bob Bolin to the Seattle Pilots for outfielders Dick Simpson and Steve Whitaker.
- December 13 – The Boston Red Sox acquire veteran left-hander Gary Peters, a 2x earned run average champion and 2x American League All-Star, and catcher Don Pavletich from the Chicago White Sox for infielder Syd O'Brien and pitcher Gerry Janeski ("PTBNL").
- December 30 – Johnny Murphy, recently crowned winner of the 1969 *Sporting News* Executive of the Year Award and general manager of the reigning world champion New York Mets, is hospitalized after suffering a heart attack. He dies on January 14, 1970.
