---
title: "1040"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1040
domain: 1112
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1112
fetched: 2026-07-04
---

# 1040

Year **1040** (**MXL**) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.

## Events

### By place

#### Europe

- Spring – Nikephoros Dokeianos, Byzantine governor of the Catepanate of Italy, is murdered by Lombard rebels at Ascoli. He is replaced by Michael Dokeianos, who arrives in November with a Varangian army.
- August 22–23 – Battle at Brůdek: Duke Bretislav I of Bohemia defeats the German forces under King Henry III ("the Black") in the Bohemian Forest.
- Peter Delyan leads a rebellion against the Byzantine Empire and is proclaimed by the Bulgarian nobles as emperor (*tsar*) Peter II in Belgrade.
- The Emirate of Sicily is divided and fragmented into small fiefdoms. The Arab nobles of Palermo restore the regime of the Kalbids (approximate date).

#### Britain

- March 17 – King Harold Harefoot dies at Oxford at the age of 24. His illegitimate son Ælfwine Haroldsson is left in the care of his grandmother, Ælfgifu of Northampton.
- June 17 – Harthacnut lands at Sandwich and reclaims the throne of England which had been taken by Harald Harefoot in 1035.
- August 14 – King Duncan is killed in battle against his first cousin and rival Macbeth, who succeeds him as king of Scotland.

#### Islamic world

- May 23 – Battle of Dandanaqan: The Turkmen Seljuqs defeat the Ghaznavid forces (50,000 men) led by Sultan Mas'ud I at Dandanaqan, a fortress city in the desert near Merv. Ghaznavid commanders Ali Daya and Begtoghdi are blamed for the defeat and executed.

### By topic

#### Religion

- Weihenstephan Abbey (*Kloster Weihenstephan*) in Germany, founds the oldest operating brewery.
- The Shalu Monastery is founded by the Buddhist monk Chetsun Sherab Jungnay in Tibet.

## Births

- February 22 – Rashi, French rabbi and writer (d. 1105)
- July 12 – Yun Kwan, Korean general (d. 1111)
- Adelaide of Hungary, duchess of Bohemia (d. 1062)
- Alan Rufus, Norman nobleman (approximate date)
- Alfonso VI, king of León and Castile (approximate date)
- Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad, Abbadid emir of Seville (d. 1095) (approximate date)
- Arnold of Soissons, French bishop (approximate date)
- Blessed Gerard, founder of the Knights Hospitaller (d. 1120) (approximate date)
- Bonfilius, bishop of Foligno (approximate date)
- Conrad I, count of Luxembourg (approximate date)
- Ernulf, French Benedictine monk and bishop (d. 1124)
- Gebhard III, bishop of Constance (approximate date)
- Geoffrey III, Count of Anjou, French nobleman (approximate date)
- Géza I (Magnus), king of Hungary (approximate date)
- Guérin of Aumale, Founder of House of Aumale (d. 1100)
- Guglielmo Embriaco, Genoese merchant (d. 1102) (approximate date)
- Haziga of Diessen, German countess (approximate date)
- Harald III, king of Denmark (approximate date)
- Herman I, margrave of Baden (approximate date)
- Hugh I, French nobleman (approximate date)
- Hugh of Die, French bishop (approximate date)
- Ibn Aqil, Persian theologian and jurist (d. 1119) (approximate date)
- Ida of Lorraine, French countess (approximate date)
- Ivo of Chartres, French bishop (approximate date)
- Ladislaus I, king of Hungary (approximate date)
- Oddone Frangipane, Italian monk and hermit (d. 1127)
- Odo I of Furneaux (or Eudes), French nobleman (d. 1086)
- Roger I of Sicily, Norman nobleman (approximate date)
- Sikelgaita, Lombard duchess of Apulia (d. 1090)
- Wulfnoth Godwinson, English nobleman (d. 1094)
- Xiao Guanyin, Chinese empress consort of the Liao dynasty (d. 1075)
- Zayn al-Din Gorgani, Persian physician (d. 1136) (approximate date)

## Deaths

- January 17 – Mas'ud I, Ghaznavid sultan (b. 998)
- March 3 – Cunigunde, Holy Roman Empress
- March 17 – Harold Harefoot, king of England
- May 29 – Renauld I, French nobleman
- June 21 – Fulk III, French nobleman (b. 970)
- August 14 – Duncan I, king of Scotland
- October 1 – Alan III, duke of Brittany (b. 997)
- Abu Hashim al-Hasan, Zaidi imam and ruler of Jemen
- Abu Nasr Mushkan, Persian statesman (or 1039)
- Ali Daya, Ghaznavid commander-in-chief, executed
- Begtoghdi, Ghaznavid commander-in-chief, executed
- Bertha of Milan, Lombard duchess (approximate date)
- Dietrich I, bishop of Meissen (approximate date)
- Gilbert, Count of Brionne, Norman nobleman (approximate date)
- Helias of Cologne, Irish abbot and musician
- Hugh, Italian nobleman (approximate date)
- Hugh I, count of Empúries and Peralada
- Ibn al-Haytham, Arab astronomer (approximate date)
- John V, duke of Gaeta (approximate date)
- Maria of Amalfi, Lombard duchess (approximate date)
- Nikephoros Dokeianos, Byzantine general
- Unsuri, Persian poet and writer (or 1039)
- Yeshe-Ö, Tibetan lama-king (approximate date)
