---
title: "1050"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1050
domain: 1112
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: 1112
fetched: 2026-07-04
---

# 1050

Year **1050** (**ML**) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.

## Events

### By place

#### Europe

- Hedeby in Jutland is sacked by King Harald Hardrada of Norway, during the course of a conflict with Sweyn II of Denmark.
- King Anund Jacob dies after a 28-year reign. He is succeeded by his elder half-brother Emund the Old as king of Sweden.
- Macbeth, King of Scotland, makes a pilgrimage to Rome.

#### Africa

- Aoudaghost, an important Berber trading center and rival of Koumbi Saleh, is captured by the Ghana Empire.

### By topic

#### Religion

- King Edward the Confessor unites the English dioceses of Devon and Cornwall. He moves the see from Crediton to Exeter and gives the order to build a cathedral. Leofric becomes the first bishop of Exeter.
- The brewery of Weltenburg Abbey (modern Germany) is first mentioned, thus making it one of the oldest still operating breweries in the world (approximate date).

## Births

- November 11 – Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1106)
- Amadeus II, count of Savoy (approximate date)
- Berthold II, duke of Swabia (approximate date)
- Bertrand of Comminges, French bishop (d. 1126)
- Frederick I, duke of Swabia (approximate date)
- Leopold II ("the Fair"), margrave of Austria (d. 1095)
- Lhachen Gyalpo, king of Ladakh (approximate date)
- Liutold of Eppenstein, German nobleman (approximate date)
- Li Tang, Chinese landscape painter (approximate date)
- Lope Íñiguez, lord of Biscay (approximate date)
- Michael VII Doukas, Byzantine emperor (approximate date)
- Muhammad al-Baghdadi, Arab mathematician (d. 1141)
- Muirchertach Ua Briain, king of Munster (approximate date)
- Olaf I ("Hunger"), king of Denmark (approximate date)
- Olaf III ("the Peaceful"), king of Norway (approximate date)
- Osbern of Canterbury, English hagiographer (d. 1090)
- Peter the Hermit, French priest (approximate date)
- Sophia of Hungary, duchess of Saxony (approximate date)
- Sviatopolk II, Grand Prince of Kiev (d. 1113)
- Vidyakara, Indian Buddhist scholar (d. 1130)

## Deaths

- February 10 – Anna, Grand Princess of Kiev (b. 1001)
- October 29 – Eadsige, archbishop of Canterbury
- Alferius (or Alferio), Italian abbot and saint (b. 930)
- Anund Jacob (or James), king of Sweden (b. 1008)
- Casilda of Toledo, Spanish saint (approximate date)
- Constantine Arianites, Byzantine general
- Einar Thambarskelfir, Norwegian nobleman
- Herleva, Norman noblewoman (approximate date)
- Hugh of Langres, French bishop and theologian
- Humphrey de Vieilles, Norman nobleman
- Michael Dokeianos, Byzantine general
- Suryavarman I, king of the Khmer Empire
- Wifred II, count of Cerdanya and Berga
- Zoë, empress of the Byzantine Empire
