---
title: "Cathode ray tube (part 2/4)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathode-ray_tube
domain: waveform-monitor
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: waveform monitor
fetched: 2026-07-03
part: 2/4
---

## Constructions

### Body

The body of a CRT is usually made up of three parts: A screen/faceplate/panel, a cone/funnel, and a neck. The joined screen, funnel and neck are known as the bulb or envelope.

The neck is made from a glass tube while the funnel and screen are made by pouring and then pressing glass into a mold. The glass, known as CRT glass or TV glass, needs special properties to shield against x-rays while providing adequate light transmission in the screen or being very electrically insulating in the funnel and neck. The formulation that gives the glass its properties is also known as the melt. The glass is of very high quality, being almost contaminant and defect free. Most of the costs associated with glass production come from the energy used to melt the raw materials into glass. Glass furnaces for CRT glass production have several taps to allow molds to be replaced without stopping the furnace, to allow production of CRTs of several sizes. Only the glass used on the screen needs to have precise optical properties.

The optical properties of the glass used on the screen affect color reproduction and purity in color CRTs. Transmittance, or how transparent the glass is, may be adjusted to be more transparent to certain colors (wavelengths) of light. Transmittance is measured at the center of the screen with a 546 nm wavelength light, and a 10.16mm thick screen. Transmittance goes down with increasing thickness. Standard transmittances for Color CRT screens are 86%, 73%, 57%, 46%, 42% and 30%. Lower transmittances are used to improve image contrast but they put more stress on the electron gun, requiring more power on the electron gun for a higher electron beam power to light the phosphors more brightly to compensate for the reduced transmittance. The transmittance must be uniform across the screen to ensure color purity. The radius (curvature) of screens has increased (grown less curved) over time, from 30 to 68 inches, ultimately evolving into completely flat screens, reducing reflections. The thickness of both curved and flat screens gradually increases from the center outwards, and with it, transmittance is gradually reduced. This means that flat-screen CRTs may not be completely flat on the inside.

The glass used in CRTs arrives from the glass factory to the CRT factory as either separate screens and funnels with flame-fused necks, for Color CRTs, or as bulbs made up of a flame-fused screen, funnel and neck. There were several glass formulations for different types of CRTs, that were classified using codes specific to each glass manufacturer. The compositions of the melts were also specific to each manufacturer. Those optimized for high color purity and contrast were doped with Neodymium, while those for monochrome CRTs were tinted to differing levels, depending on the formulation used and had transmittances of 42% or 30%. Purity is ensuring that the correct colors are activated (for example, ensuring that red is displayed uniformly across the screen) while convergence ensures that images are not distorted. Convergence may be modified using a cross hatch pattern.

CRT glass used to be made by dedicated companies such as AGC Inc., O-I Glass, Samsung Corning Precision Materials, Corning Inc., and Nippon Electric Glass; others such as Videocon, Sony for the US market and Thomson made their own glass.

The funnel and the neck are made of leaded potash-soda glass or lead silicate glass formulation to shield against x-rays generated by high voltage electrons as they decelerate after striking a target, such as the phosphor screen or shadow mask of a color CRT. The velocity of the electrons depends on the anode voltage of the CRT; the higher the voltage, the higher the speed. The amount of x-rays emitted by a CRT can also lowered by reducing the brightness of the image. Leaded glass is used because it is inexpensive, while also shielding heavily against x-rays, although some funnels may also contain barium. The screen is usually instead made out of a special lead-free silicate glass formulation with barium and strontium to shield against x-rays, as it doesn't brown unlike glass containing lead. Another glass formulation uses 2–3% of lead on the screen. Alternatively zirconium can also be used on the screen in combination with barium, instead of lead.

Monochrome CRTs may have a tinted barium-lead glass formulation in both the screen and funnel, with a potash-soda lead glass in the neck; the potash-soda and barium-lead formulations have different thermal expansion coefficients. The glass used in the neck must be an excellent electrical insulator to contain the voltages used in the electron optics of the electron gun, such as focusing lenses. The lead in the glass causes it to brown (darken) with use due to x-rays, usually the CRT cathode wears out due to cathode poisoning before browning becomes apparent. The glass formulation determines the highest possible anode voltage and hence the maximum possible CRT screen size. For color, maximum voltages are often 24–32 kV, while for monochrome it is usually 21 or 24.5 kV, limiting the size of monochrome CRTs to 21 inches, or ~1 kV per inch. The voltage needed depends on the size and type of CRT. Since the formulations are different, they must be compatible with one another, having similar thermal expansion coefficients. The screen may also have an anti-glare or anti-reflective coating, or be ground to prevent reflections. CRTs may also have an anti-static coating.

The leaded glass in the funnels of CRTs may contain 21–25% of lead oxide (PbO), The neck may contain 30–40% of lead oxide, and the screen may contain 12% of barium oxide, and 12% of strontium oxide. A typical CRT contains several kilograms of lead as lead oxide in the glass depending on its size; 12 inch CRTs contain 0.5 kg of lead in total while 32 inch CRTs contain up to 3 kg. Strontium oxide began being used in CRTs, its major application, in the 1970s. Before this, CRTs used lead on the faceplate.

Some early CRTs used a metal funnel insulated with polyethylene instead of glass with conductive material. Others had ceramic or blown Pyrex instead of pressed glass funnels. Early CRTs did not have a dedicated anode cap connection; the funnel was the anode connection, so it was live during operation.

The funnel is coated on the inside and outside with a conductive coating, making the funnel a capacitor, helping stabilize and filter the anode voltage of the CRT, and significantly reducing the amount of time needed to turn on a CRT. The stability provided by the coating solved problems inherent to early power supply designs, as they used vacuum tubes. Because the funnel is used as a capacitor, the glass used in the funnel must be an excellent electrical insulator (dielectric). The inner coating has a positive voltage (the anode voltage that can be several kV) while the outer coating is connected to ground. CRTs powered by more modern power supplies do not need to be connected to ground, due to the more robust design of modern power supplies. The value of the capacitor formed by the funnel is 5–10 nF, although at the voltage the anode is normally supplied with. The capacitor formed by the funnel can also suffer from dielectric absorption, similarly to other types of capacitors. Because of this CRTs have to be discharged before handling to prevent injury.

The depth of a CRT is related to its screen size. Usual deflection angles were 90° for computer monitor CRTs and small CRTs and 110° which was the standard in larger TV CRTs, with 120 or 125° being used in slim CRTs made since 2001–2005 in an attempt to compete with LCD TVs. Over time, deflection angles increased as they became practical, from 50° in 1938 to 110° in 1959, and 125° in the 2000s. 140° deflection CRTs were researched but never commercialized, as convergence (alignment of red, green, blue electron guns) problems were never resolved.

- (A monochrome CRT with 110° deflection) A monochrome CRT with 110° deflection
- (A monochrome CRT with 90° deflection) A monochrome CRT with 90° deflection

### Size and weight

The size of a CRT can be measured by the screen's *entire* area (or face diagonal) or alternatively by only its *viewable* area (or diagonal) that is coated by phosphor and surrounded by black edges.

While the viewable area may be rectangular, the edges of the CRT may have a curvature (e.g. black stripe CRTs, first made by Toshiba in 1972) or the edges may be black and truly flat (e.g. Flatron CRTs), or the viewable area may follow the curvature of the edges of the CRT (with or without black edges or curved edges).

Small CRTs below 3 inches were made for handheld TVs such as the MTV-1 and viewfinders in camcorders. In these, there may be no black edges, that are however truly flat.

Most of the weight of a CRT comes from the thick glass screen, which comprises 65% of the total weight of a CRT and limits its practical size (see § Size). The funnel and neck glass comprise the remaining 30% and 5% respectively. The glass in the funnel can vary in thickness, to join the thin neck with the thick screen. Chemically or thermally tempered glass may be used to reduce the weight of the CRT glass.

### Anode

The outer conductive coating is connected to ground while the inner conductive coating is connected using the anode button/cap through a series of capacitors and diodes (a Cockcroft–Walton generator) to the high voltage flyback transformer; the inner coating is the anode of the CRT, which, together with an electrode in the electron gun, is also known as the final anode. The inner coating is connected to the electrode using springs. The electrode forms part of a bipotential lens. The capacitors and diodes serve as a voltage multiplier for the current delivered by the flyback.

The anode is used to accelerate the electrons towards the screen and also collects the secondary electrons that are emitted by the phosphor particles in the vacuum of the CRT.

For the inner funnel coating, monochrome CRTs use aluminum while color CRTs use aquadag; Some CRTs may use iron oxide on the inside. On the outside, most CRTs use aquadag. Aquadag is an electrically conductive graphite-based paint. In color CRTs, the aquadag is sprayed onto the interior of the funnel whereas historically aquadag was painted into the interior of monochrome CRTs.

The anode cap connection in modern CRTs must be able to handle up to 55–60kV depending on the size and brightness of the CRT. Higher voltages allow for larger CRTs, higher image brightness, or a tradeoff between the two. It consists of a metal clip that expands on the inside of an anode button that is embedded on the funnel glass of the CRT. The connection is insulated by a silicone suction cup, possibly also using silicone grease to prevent corona discharge.

The anode button must be specially shaped to establish a hermetic seal between the button and funnel. X-rays may leak through the anode button, although that may not be the case in newer CRTs starting from the late 1970s to early 1980s, thanks to a new button and clip design. The button may consist of a set of 3 nested cups, with the outermost cup being made of a Nickel–Chromium–Iron alloy containing 40–49% of Nickel and 3–6% of Chromium to make the button easy to fuse to the funnel glass, with a first inner cup made of thick inexpensive iron to shield against x-rays, and with the second innermost cup also being made of iron or any other electrically conductive metal to connect to the clip. The cups must be heat resistant enough and have similar thermal expansion coefficients similar to that of the funnel glass to withstand being fused to the funnel glass. The inner side of the button is connected to the inner conductive coating of the CRT. The anode button may be attached to the funnel while its being pressed into shape in a mold. Alternatively, the x-ray shielding may instead be built into the clip.

The flyback transformer is also known as an IHVT (Integrated High Voltage Transformer) if it includes a voltage multiplier. The flyback uses a ceramic or powdered iron core to enable efficient operation at high frequencies. The flyback contains one primary and many secondary windings that provide several different voltages. The main secondary winding supplies the voltage multiplier with voltage pulses to ultimately supply the CRT with the high anode voltage it uses, while the remaining windings supply the CRT's filament voltage, keying pulses, focus voltage and voltages derived from the scan raster. When the transformer is turned off, the flyback's magnetic field quickly collapses which induces high voltage in its windings. The speed at which the magnetic field collapses determines the voltage that is induced, so the voltage increases alongside its speed. A capacitor (Retrace Timing Capacitor) or series of capacitors (to provide redundancy) is used to slow the collapse of the magnetic field.

The design of the high voltage power supply in a product using a CRT has an influence in the amount of x-rays emitted by the CRT. The amount of emitted x-rays increases with both higher voltages and currents. If the product such as a TV set uses an unregulated high voltage power supply, meaning that anode and focus voltage go down with increasing electron current when displaying a bright image, the amount of emitted x-rays is as its highest when the CRT is displaying a moderately bright images, since when displaying dark or bright images, the higher anode voltage counteracts the lower electron beam current and vice versa respectively. The high voltage regulator and rectifier vacuum tubes in some old CRT TV sets may also emit x-rays.

### Electron gun

The electron gun emits the electrons that ultimately hit the phosphors on the screen of the CRT. The electron gun contains a heater, which heats a cathode, which generates electrons that, using grids, are focused and ultimately accelerated into the screen of the CRT. The acceleration occurs in conjunction with the inner aluminum or aquadag coating of the CRT. The electron gun is positioned so that it aims at the center of the screen. It is inside the neck of the CRT, and it is held together and mounted to the neck using glass beads or glass support rods, which are the glass strips on the electron gun. The electron gun is made separately and then placed inside the neck through a process called "winding", or sealing. The electron gun has a glass wafer that is fused to the neck of the CRT. The connections to the electron gun penetrate the glass wafer. Once the electron gun is inside the neck, its metal parts (grids) are arced between each other using high voltage to smooth any rough edges in a process called spot knocking, to prevent the rough edges in the grids from generating secondary electrons.

#### Construction and method of operation

The electron gun has an indirectly heated hot cathode that is heated by a tungsten filament heating element; the heater may draw 0.5–2 A of current depending on the CRT. The voltage applied to the heater can affect the life of the CRT. Heating the cathode energizes the electrons in it, aiding electron emission, while at the same time current is supplied to the cathode; typically anywhere from 140 mA at 1.5 V to 600 mA at 6.3 V. The cathode emits low energy electrons, which are accelerated and focused into an electron beam. Color CRTs have three cathodes: one for red, green and blue. The heater sits inside the cathode but does not touch it; the cathode has its own separate electrical connection. The cathode is a material coated onto a piece of nickel which provides the electrical connection and structural support; the heater sits inside this piece without touching it.

There are several short circuits that can occur in a CRT electron gun. One is a heater-to-cathode short, that causes the cathode to permanently emit electrons which may cause an image with a bright red, green or blue tint with retrace lines, depending on the cathode (s) affected. Alternatively, the cathode may short to the control grid, possibly causing similar effects, or, the control grid and screen grid (G2) can short causing a very dark image or no image at all. The cathode may be surrounded by a shield to prevent sputtering.

The cathode is a layer of barium oxide which is coated on a piece of nickel for electrical and mechanical support. The barium oxide must be activated by heating to enable it to release electrons. Activation is necessary because barium oxide is not stable in air, so it is applied to the cathode as barium carbonate, which cannot emit electrons. Activation heats the barium carbonate to decompose it into barium oxide and carbon dioxide while forming a thin layer of metallic barium on the cathode. Activation is done when forming the vacuum (described in § Evacuation). After activation, the oxide can become damaged by several common gases such as water vapor, carbon dioxide, and oxygen. Alternatively, barium strontium calcium carbonate may be used instead of barium carbonate, yielding barium, strontium and calcium oxides after activation. During operation, the barium oxide is heated to 800–1000°C, at which point it starts shedding electrons.

Since it is a hot cathode, it is prone to cathode poisoning, which is the formation of a positive ion layer that prevents the cathode from emitting electrons, reducing image brightness significantly or completely and causing focus and intensity to be affected by the frequency of the video signal preventing detailed images from being displayed by the CRT. The positive ions come from leftover air molecules inside the CRT or from the cathode itself that react over time with the surface of the hot cathode. Reducing metals such as manganese, zirconium, magnesium, aluminum or titanium may be added to the piece of nickel to lengthen the life of the cathode, as during activation, the reducing metals diffuse into the barium oxide, improving its lifespan, especially at high electron beam currents. In color CRTs with red, green and blue cathodes, one or more cathodes may be affected independently of the others, causing total or partial loss of one or more colors. CRTs can wear or burn out due to cathode poisoning. Cathode poisoning is accelerated by increased cathode current (overdriving). In color CRTs, since there are three cathodes, one for red, green and blue, a single or more poisoned cathode may cause the partial or complete loss of one or more colors, tinting the image. The layer may also act as a capacitor in series with the cathode, inducing thermal lag. The cathode may instead be made of scandium oxide or incorporate it as a dopant, to delay cathode poisoning, extending the life of the cathode by up to 15%.

The rate of emission of electrons from the cathodes is related to their surface area. A cathode with more surface area creates more electrons, in a larger electron cloud, which makes focusing the electron cloud into an electron beam more difficult. Normally, only a part of the cathode emits electrons unless the CRT displays images with parts that are at full image brightness; only the parts at full brightness cause all of the cathode to emit electrons. The area of the cathode that emits electrons grows from the center outwards as brightness increases, so cathode wear may be uneven. When only the center of the cathode is worn, the CRT may light brightly those parts of images that have full image brightness but not show darker parts of images at all, in such a case the CRT displays a poor gamma characteristic.

A voltage negative with respect to the cathode is applied to the first (control) grid (G1) to control the emission of electrons into the rest of the electron gun. G1 in practice is a Wehnelt cylinder. The brightness of the image on the screen depends on both the anode voltage and the electron beam current and in practise the latter is constant, while the former is controlled by varying the difference in voltage between the cathode and the G1 control grid. The second (screen) grid of the gun (G2) then accelerates the electrons towards the screen using several hundred DC volts. Then a third grid (G3) electrostatically focuses the electron beam before it is deflected and later accelerated by the anode voltage onto the screen. Electrostatic focusing of the electron beam may be accomplished using an einzel lens energized at up to 600 volts. Before electrostatic focusing, focusing the electron beam required a large, heavy and complex mechanical focusing system placed outside the electron gun.

However, electrostatic focusing cannot be accomplished near the final anode of the CRT due to its high voltage in the dozens of Kilovolts, so a high voltage (≈600–8000 V) electrode, together with an electrode at the final anode voltage of the CRT, may be used for focusing instead. Such an arrangement is called a bipotential lens, which also offers higher performance than an einzel lens, or, focusing may be accomplished using a magnetic focusing coil together with a high anode voltage of dozens of kilovolts. However, magnetic focusing is expensive to implement, so it is rarely used in practice. Some CRTs may use two grids and lenses to focus the electron beam. The focus voltage is generated in the flyback using a subset of the flyback's high voltage winding in conjunction with a resistive voltage divider. The focus electrode is connected alongside the other connections that are in the neck of the CRT.

There is a voltage called cutoff voltage which is the voltage that creates black on the screen since it causes the image on the screen created by the electron beam to disappear, the voltage is applied to G1. In a color CRT with three guns, the guns have different cutoff voltages. Many CRTs share grid G1 and G2 across all three guns, increasing image brightness and simplifying adjustment since on such CRTs there is a single cutoff voltage for all three guns (since G1 is shared across all guns). but placing additional stress on the video amplifier used to feed video into the electron gun's cathodes, since the cutoff voltage becomes higher. Monochrome CRTs do not suffer from this problem. In monochrome CRTs video is fed to the gun by varying the voltage on the first control grid.

During retracing of the electron beam, the preamplifier that feeds the video amplifier is disabled and the video amplifier is biased to a voltage higher than the cutoff voltage to prevent retrace lines from showing, or G1 can have a large negative voltage applied to it to prevent electrons from getting out of the cathode. This is known as blanking. (see Vertical blanking interval and Horizontal blanking interval.) Incorrect biasing can lead to visible retrace lines on one or more colors, creating retrace lines that are tinted or white (for example, tinted red if the red color is affected, tinted magenta if the red and blue colors are affected, and white if all colors are affected). Alternatively, the amplifier may be driven by a video processor that also introduces an OSD (On Screen Display) into the video stream that is fed into the amplifier, using a fast blanking signal. TV sets and computer monitors that incorporate CRTs need a DC restoration circuit to provide a video signal to the CRT with a DC component, restoring the original brightness of different parts of the image.

The electron beam may be affected by the Earth's magnetic field, causing it to normally enter the focusing lens off-center; this can be corrected using astigmation controls. Astigmation controls are both magnetic and electronic (dynamic); magnetic does most of the work while electronic is used for fine adjustments. One of the ends of the electron gun has a glass disk, the edges of which are fused with the edge of the neck of the CRT, possibly using frit; the metal leads that connect the electron gun to the outside pass through the disk.

Some electron guns have a quadrupole lens with dynamic focus to alter the shape and adjust the focus of the electron beam, varying the focus voltage depending on the position of the electron beam to maintain image sharpness across the entire screen, specially at the corners. They may also have a bleeder resistor to derive voltages for the grids from the final anode voltage.

After the CRTs were manufactured, they were aged to allow cathode emission to stabilize.

The electron guns in color CRTs are driven by a video amplifier which takes a signal per color channel and amplifies it to 40–170 V per channel, to be fed into the electron gun's cathodes; each electron gun has its own channel (one per color) and all channels may be driven by the same amplifier, which internally has three separate channels. The amplifier's capabilities limit the resolution, refresh rate and contrast ratio of the CRT, as the amplifier needs to provide high bandwidth and voltage variations at the same time; higher resolutions and refresh rates need higher bandwidths (speed at which voltage can be varied and thus switching between black and white) and higher contrast ratios need higher voltage variations or amplitude for lower black and higher white levels. 30 MHz of bandwidth can usually provide 720p or 1080i resolution, while 20 MHz usually provides around 600 (horizontal, from top to bottom) lines of resolution, for example. The difference in voltage between the cathode and the control grid is what modulates the electron beam, modulating its current and thus creating shades of colors which create the image line by line and this can also affect the brightness of the image. The phosphors used in color CRTs produce different amounts of light for a given amount of energy, so to produce white on a color CRT, all three guns must output differing amounts of energy. The gun that outputs the most energy is the red gun since the red phosphor emits the least amount of light.

#### Gamma

CRTs have a pronounced triode characteristic, which results in significant gamma (a nonlinear relationship in an electron gun between applied video voltage and beam intensity).

### Deflection

There are two types of deflection: magnetic and electrostatic. Magnetic is usually used in TVs and monitors as it allows for higher deflection angles (and hence shallower CRTs) and deflection power (which allows for higher electron beam current and hence brighter images) while avoiding the need for high voltages for deflection of up to 2 kV, while oscilloscopes often use electrostatic deflection since the raw waveforms captured by the oscilloscope can be applied directly (after amplification) to the vertical electrostatic deflection plates inside the CRT.

#### Magnetic deflection

Those that use magnetic deflection may use a yoke that has two pairs of deflection coils; one pair for vertical, and another for horizontal deflection. The yoke can be bonded (be integral) or removable. Those that were bonded used glue or a plastic to bond the yoke to the area between the neck and the funnel of the CRT while those with removable yokes are clamped. The yoke generates heat whose removal is essential since the conductivity of glass goes up with increasing temperature, the glass needs to be insulating for the CRT to remain usable as a capacitor. The temperature of the glass below the yoke is thus checked during the design of a new yoke. The yoke contains the deflection and convergence coils with a ferrite core to reduce loss of magnetic force as well as the magnetized rings used to align or adjust the electron beams in color CRTs (The color purity and convergence rings, for example) and monochrome CRTs. The yoke may be connected using a connector, the order in which the deflection coils of the yoke are connected determines the orientation of the image displayed by the CRT. The deflection coils may be held in place using polyurethane glue.

The deflection coils are driven by sawtooth signals that may be delivered through VGA as horizontal and vertical sync signals. A CRT needs two deflection circuits: a horizontal and a vertical circuit, which are similar except that the horizontal circuit runs at a much higher frequency (a Horizontal scan rate) of 15–240 kHz depending on the refresh rate of the CRT and the number of horizontal lines to be drawn (the vertical resolution of the CRT). The higher frequency makes it more susceptible to interference, so an automatic frequency control (AFC) circuit may be used to lock the phase of the horizontal deflection signal to that of a sync signal, to prevent the image from becoming distorted diagonally. The vertical frequency varies according to the refresh rate of the CRT. So a CRT with a 60 Hz refresh rate has a vertical deflection circuit running at 60 Hz. The horizontal and vertical deflection signals may be generated using two circuits that work differently; the horizontal deflection signal may be generated using a voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) while the vertical signal may be generated using a triggered relaxation oscillator. In many TVs, the frequencies at which the deflection coils run is in part determined by the inductance value of the coils. CRTs had differing deflection angles; the higher the deflection angle, the shallower the CRT for a given screen size, but at the cost of more deflection power and lower optical performance.

Higher deflection power means more current is sent to the deflection coils to bend the electron beam at a higher angle, which in turn may generate more heat or require electronics that can handle the increased power. Heat is generated due to resistive and core losses. The deflection power is measured in mA per inch. The vertical deflection coils may require ~24 volts while the horizontal deflection coils require ~120 volts to operate.

The deflection coils are driven by deflection amplifiers. The horizontal deflection coils may also be driven in part by the horizontal output stage of a TV set. The stage contains a capacitor that is in series with the horizontal deflection coils that performs several functions, among them are: shaping the sawtooth deflection signal to match the curvature of the CRT and centering the image by preventing a DC bias from developing on the coil. At the beginning of retrace, the magnetic field of the coil collapses, causing the electron beam to return to the center of the screen, while at the same time the coil returns energy into capacitors, the energy of which is then used to force the electron beam to go to the left of the screen.

Due to the high frequency at which the horizontal deflection coils operate, the energy in the deflection coils must be recycled to reduce heat dissipation. Recycling is done by transferring the energy in the deflection coils' magnetic field to a set of capacitors. The voltage on the horizontal deflection coils is negative when the electron beam is on the left side of the screen and positive when the electron beam is on the right side of the screen. The energy required for deflection is dependent on the energy of the electrons. Higher energy (voltage and/or current) electron beams need more energy to be deflected, and are used to achieve higher image brightness.

#### Electrostatic deflection

Mostly used in oscilloscopes. Deflection is carried out by applying a voltage across two pairs of plates, one for horizontal, and the other for vertical deflection. The electron beam is steered by varying the voltage difference across plates in a pair; For example, applying a voltage to the upper plate of the vertical deflection pair, while keeping the voltage in the bottom plate at 0 volts, will cause the electron beam to be deflected towards the upper part of the screen; increasing the voltage in the upper plate while keeping the bottom plate at 0 will cause the electron beam to be deflected to a higher point in the screen (will cause the beam to be deflected at a higher deflection angle). The same applies with the horizontal deflection plates. Increasing the length and proximity between plates in a pair can also increase the deflection angle.

### Burn-in

Burn-in is when images are physically "burned" into the screen of the CRT; this occurs due to degradation of the phosphors due to prolonged electron bombardment of the phosphors, and happens when a fixed image or logo is left for too long on the screen, causing it to appear as a "ghost" image or, in severe cases, also when the CRT is off. To counter this, screensavers were used in computers to minimize burn-in.

### Evacuation

The CRT's partial vacuum of 0.01 pascals (1×10−7 atm) to 0.1 micropascals (1×10−12 atm) or less is evacuated or exhausted in a ~375–475 °C oven in a process called *baking* or *bake-out*. The evacuation process also outgasses any materials inside the CRT, while decomposing others such as the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) used to apply the phosphors. The heating and cooling are done gradually to avoid inducing stress, stiffening and possibly cracking the glass; the oven heats the gases inside the CRT, increasing the speed of the gas molecules which increases the chances of them getting drawn out by the vacuum pump. The temperature of the CRT is kept to below that of the oven, and the oven starts to cool just after the CRT reaches 400 °C, or, the CRT was kept at a temperature higher than 400 °C for up to 15–55 minutes. The CRT was heated during or after evacuation, and the heat may have been used simultaneously to melt the frit in the CRT, joining the screen and funnel. The pump used is a turbomolecular pump or a diffusion pump. Formerly mercury vacuum pumps were also used. After baking, the CRT is disconnected ("sealed or tipped off") from the vacuum pump. The getter is then fired using an RF (induction) coil. The getter is usually in the funnel or in the neck of the CRT. The getter material which is often barium-based, catches any remaining gas particles as it evaporates due to heating induced by the RF coil (that may be combined with exothermic heating within the material); the vapor fills the CRT, trapping any gas molecules that it encounters and condenses on the inside of the CRT forming a layer that contains trapped gas molecules. Hydrogen may be present in the material to help distribute the barium vapor. The material is heated to temperatures above 1000 °C, causing it to evaporate. Partial loss of vacuum in a CRT can result in a hazy image, blue glowing in the neck of the CRT, flashovers, loss of cathode emission or focusing problems.

### Rebuilding

CRTs used to be rebuilt; repaired or refurbished. The rebuilding process included the disassembly of the CRT, the disassembly and repair or replacement of the electron gun(s), the removal and redeposition of phosphors and aquadag, etc. Rebuilding was popular until the 1960s because CRTs were expensive and wore out quickly, making repair worth it. The last CRT rebuilder in the US closed in 2010, and the last in Europe, RACS, which was located in France, closed in 2013.

### Reactivation

Reactivation, also known as rejuvenation, is a process with the goal of temporarily restoring the brightness of a worn CRT. This is often done by carefully increasing the voltage on the cathode heater and the current and voltage on the control grids of the electron gun manually. Some rejuvenators can also fix heater-to-cathode shorts by running a capacitive discharge through the short.

### Phosphors

Phosphors in CRTs emit secondary electrons due to them being inside the vacuum of the CRT. The secondary electrons are collected by the anode of the CRT. Secondary electrons generated by phosphors need to be collected to prevent charges from developing in the screen, which would lead to reduced image brightness since the charge would repel the electron beam.

The phosphors used in CRTs often contain rare earth metals, replacing earlier dimmer phosphors. Early red and green phosphors contained Cadmium, and some black and white CRT phosphors also contained beryllium in the form of Zinc beryllium silicate, although white phosphors containing cadmium, zinc and magnesium with silver, copper or manganese as dopants were also used. The rare earth phosphors used in CRTs are more efficient (produce more light) than earlier phosphors. The phosphors adhere to the screen because of Van der Waals and electrostatic forces. Phosphors composed of smaller particles adhere more strongly to the screen. The phosphors together with the carbon used to prevent light bleeding (in color CRTs) can be easily removed by scratching.

Several dozen types of phosphors were available for CRTs. Phosphors were classified according to color, persistence, luminance rise and fall curves, color depending on anode voltage (for phosphors used in penetration CRTs), Intended use, chemical composition, safety, sensitivity to burn-in, and secondary emission properties. Examples of rare earth phosphors are yttrium oxide for red and yttrium silicide for blue in beam index tubes, while examples of earlier phosphors are copper cadmium sulfide for red,

SMPTE-C phosphors have properties defined by the SMPTE-C standard, which defines a color space of the same name. The standard prioritizes accurate color reproduction, which was made difficult by the different phosphors and color spaces used in the NTSC and PAL color systems. PAL TV sets have subjectively better color reproduction due to the use of saturated green phosphors, which have relatively long decay times that are tolerated in PAL since there is more time in PAL for phosphors to decay, due to its lower framerate. SMPTE-C phosphors were used in professional video monitors.

The phosphor coating on monochrome and color CRTs may have an aluminum coating on its rear side used to reflect light forward, provide protection against ions to prevent ion burn by negative ions on the phosphor, manage heat generated by electrons colliding against the phosphor, prevent static build up that could repel electrons from the screen, form part of the anode and collect the secondary electrons generated by the phosphors in the screen after being hit by the electron beam, providing the electrons with a return path. The electron beam passes through the aluminum coating before hitting the phosphors on the screen; the aluminum attenuates the electron beam voltage by about 1 kV. A film or lacquer may be applied to the phosphors to reduce the surface roughness of the surface formed by the phosphors to allow the aluminum coating to have a uniform surface and prevent it from touching the glass of the screen. This is known as filming. The lacquer contains solvents that are later evaporated; the lacquer may be chemically roughened to cause an aluminum coating with holes to be created to allow the solvents to escape.

#### Phosphor persistence

Various phosphors are available depending upon the needs of the measurement or display application. The brightness, color, and persistence of the illumination depends upon the type of phosphor used on the CRT screen. Phosphors are available with persistences ranging from less than one microsecond to several seconds. For visual observation of brief transient events, a long persistence phosphor may be desirable. For events which are fast and repetitive, or high frequency, a short-persistence phosphor is generally preferable. The phosphor persistence must be low enough to avoid smearing or ghosting artifacts at high refresh rates.

### Limitations and workarounds

#### Blooming

Variations in anode voltage can lead to variations in brightness in parts or all of the image, in addition to blooming, shrinkage or the image getting zoomed in or out. Lower voltages lead to blooming and zooming in, while higher voltages do the opposite. Some blooming is unavoidable, which can be seen as bright areas of an image that expand, distorting or pushing aside surrounding darker areas of the same image. Blooming occurs because bright areas have a higher electron beam current from the electron gun, making the beam wider and harder to focus. Poor voltage regulation causes focus and anode voltage to go down with increasing electron beam current.

#### Doming

Doming is a phenomenon found on some CRT TVs in which parts of the shadow mask become heated. In TVs that exhibit this behavior, it tends to occur in high-contrast scenes in which there is a largely dark scene with one or more localized bright spots. As the electron beam hits the shadow mask in these areas it heats unevenly. The shadow mask warps due to the heat differences, which causes the electron gun to hit the wrong colored phosphors and incorrect colors to be displayed in the affected area. Thermal expansion causes the shadow mask to expand by around 100 microns.

During normal operation, the shadow mask is heated to around 80–90 °C. Bright areas of images heat the shadow mask more than dark areas, leading to uneven heating of the shadow mask and warping (blooming) due to thermal expansion caused by heating by increased electron beam current. The shadow mask is usually made of steel but it can be made of Invar (a low-thermal expansion Nickel-Iron alloy) as it withstands two to three times more current than conventional masks without noticeable warping, while making higher resolution CRTs easier to achieve. Coatings that dissipate heat may be applied on the shadow mask to limit blooming in a process called blackening.

Bimetal springs may be used in CRTs used in TVs to compensate for warping that occurs as the electron beam heats the shadow mask, causing thermal expansion. The shadow mask is installed to the screen using metal pieces or a rail or frame that is fused to the funnel or the screen glass respectively, holding the shadow mask in tension to minimize warping (if the mask is flat, used in flat-screen CRT computer monitors) and allowing for higher image brightness and contrast.

Aperture grille screens are brighter since they allow more electrons through. They are also more resistant to warping. Color CRTs need higher anode voltages than monochrome CRTs to achieve the same brightness since the shadow mask blocks most of the electron beam. Slot masks and specially Aperture grilles do not block as many electrons resulting in a brighter image for a given anode voltage, but aperture grille CRTs are heavier. Shadow masks block 80–85% of the electron beam while Aperture grilles allow more electrons to pass through.

#### High voltage

Image brightness is related to the anode voltage and to the CRTs size, so higher voltages are needed for both larger screens and higher image brightness. Image brightness is also controlled by the current of the electron beam. Higher anode voltages and electron beam currents also mean higher amounts of x-rays and heat generation since the electrons have a higher speed and energy. Leaded glass and special barium-strontium glass are used to block most x-ray emissions.

#### Size

A practical limit on the size of a CRT is the weight of the thick glass needed to safely sustain its vacuum, since a CRT's exterior is exposed to the full atmospheric pressure, which for instance totals 5,800 pounds-force (26,000 N) on a 27-inch (400 in2) screen. For example, the large 43-inch Sony PVM-4300 weighs 440 lb or 200 kg, much heavier than 32-inch CRTs (up to 163 lb or 74 kg) and 19-inch CRTs (up to 60 lb or 27 kg). Much lighter flat panel TVs are only ~18 lb (8.2 kg) for 32-inch and 6.5 lb (2.9 kg) for 19-inch.

Size is also limited by anode voltage, as it would require a higher dielectric strength to prevent arcing and the electrical losses and ozone generation it causes, without sacrificing image brightness.

Shadow masks also become more difficult to make with increasing resolution and size.

#### Limits imposed by deflection

At high deflection angles, resolutions, and refresh rates (since higher resolutions and refresh rates require significantly higher frequencies to be applied to the horizontal deflection coils), the deflection yoke starts to produce large amounts of heat, due to the need to move the electron beam at a higher angle, which in turn requires increasingly larger amounts of power. As an example, to increase the deflection angle from 90 to 120°, power consumption of the yoke must also go up from 40 watts to 80 watts, and to increase it further from 120 to 150°, deflection power must again go up from 80 to 160 watts. This normally makes CRTs that go beyond certain deflection angles, resolutions and refresh rates impractical, since the coils would generate too much heat due to resistance caused by the skin effect, surface and eddy current losses, and/or possibly causing the glass underneath the coil to become conductive (as the electrical conductivity of glass increases with increasing temperature). Some deflection yokes are designed to dissipate the heat that comes from their operation. Higher deflection angles in color CRTs directly affect convergence at the corners of the screen which requires additional compensation circuitry to handle electron beam power and shape, leading to higher costs and power consumption. Higher deflection angles allow a CRT of a given size to be slimmer, however they also impose more stress on the CRT envelope, specially on the panel, the seal between the panel and funnel and on the funnel. The funnel needs to be long enough to minimize stress, as a longer funnel can be better shaped to have lower stress.


## Comparison with other technologies

One of the defining points of comparison

- LCD advantages over CRT: Lower bulk, power consumption and heat generation, higher refresh rates (up to 360 Hz)
- CRT advantages over LCD: Better color reproduction, no motion blur, multisyncing available in many monitors, no input lag
- OLED advantages over CRT: Lower bulk, similar color reproduction, higher contrast ratios, similar refresh rates (over 60 Hz, up to 120 Hz) except for computer monitors.

On CRTs, refresh rates depend on resolution, both of which are ultimately limited by the maximum horizontal scanning frequency of the CRT. Motion blur also depends on the decay time of the phosphors. Phosphors that decay too slowly for a given refresh rate may cause smearing or motion blur on the image. In practice, CRTs are limited to a refresh rate of 160 Hz. LCDs that can compete with OLED (Dual Layer, and mini-LED LCDs) are not available in high refresh rates, although quantum dot LCDs (QLEDs) are available in high refresh rates (up to 144 Hz) and are competitive in color reproduction with OLEDs.

CRT monitors can still outperform LCD and OLED monitors in input lag, as there is no signal processing between the CRT and the display connector of the monitor, since CRT monitors often use VGA which provides an analog signal that can be fed to a CRT directly. Video cards designed for use with CRTs may have a RAMDAC to generate the analog signals needed by the CRT. Also, CRT monitors are often capable of displaying sharp images at several resolutions, an ability known as multisyncing. Due to these reasons, CRTs are often preferred for playing video games made in the early 2000s and prior in spite of their bulk, weight and heat generation, with some pieces of technology requiring a CRT to function due to not being built with the functionality of modern displays in mind.

CRTs tend to be more durable than their flat panel counterparts, though specialised LCDs that have similar durability also exist.
