---
title: "Markov chain (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_chain
domain: autoregressive-models
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: autoregressive model, sequential prediction, next token prediction, time series model
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## Applications

Markov chains have been employed in a wide range of topics across the natural and social sciences, and in technological applications.

### Physics

Markovian systems appear extensively in thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, whenever probabilities are used to represent unknown or unmodelled details of the system, if it can be assumed that the dynamics are time-invariant, and that no relevant history need be considered which is not already included in the state description. For example, a thermodynamic state operates under a probability distribution that is difficult or expensive to acquire. Therefore, Markov Chain Monte Carlo method can be used to draw samples randomly from a black-box to approximate the probability distribution of attributes over a range of objects.

Markov chains are used in lattice QCD simulations.

### Chemistry

${\ce {{E}+{\underset {Substrate \atop binding}{S<=>E}}{\overset {Catalytic \atop step}{S->E}}+P}}$

Michaelis-Menten kinetics

. The enzyme (E) binds a substrate (S) and produces a product (P). Each reaction is a state transition in a Markov chain.

A reaction network is a chemical system involving multiple reactions and chemical species. The simplest stochastic models of such networks treat the system as a continuous time Markov chain with the state being the number of molecules of each species and with reactions modeled as possible transitions of the chain. Markov chains and continuous-time Markov processes are useful in chemistry when physical systems closely approximate the Markov property. For example, imagine a large number *n* of molecules in solution in state A, each of which can undergo a chemical reaction to state B with a certain average rate. Perhaps the molecule is an enzyme, and the states refer to how it is folded. The state of any single enzyme follows a Markov chain, and since the molecules are essentially independent of each other, the number of molecules in state A or B at a time is *n* times the probability a given molecule is in that state.

The classical model of enzyme activity, Michaelis–Menten kinetics, can be viewed as a Markov chain, where at each time step the reaction proceeds in some direction. While Michaelis-Menten is fairly straightforward, far more complicated reaction networks can also be modeled with Markov chains.

An algorithm based on a Markov chain was also used to focus the fragment-based growth of chemicals in silico towards a desired class of compounds such as drugs or natural products. As a molecule is grown, a fragment is selected from the nascent molecule as the "current" state. It is not aware of its past (that is, it is not aware of what is already bonded to it). It then transitions to the next state when a fragment is attached to it. The transition probabilities are trained on databases of authentic classes of compounds.

Also, the growth (and composition) of copolymers may be modeled using Markov chains. Based on the reactivity ratios of the monomers that make up the growing polymer chain, the chain's composition may be calculated (for example, whether monomers tend to add in alternating fashion or in long runs of the same monomer). Due to steric effects, second-order Markov effects may also play a role in the growth of some polymer chains.

Similarly, it has been suggested that the crystallization and growth of some epitaxial superlattice oxide materials can be accurately described by Markov chains.

### Biology

Markov chains are used in various areas of biology. Notable examples include:

- Phylogenetics and bioinformatics, where most models of DNA evolution use continuous-time Markov chains to describe the nucleotide present at a given site in the genome.
- Population dynamics, where Markov chains are in particular a central tool in the theoretical study of matrix population models.
- Neurobiology, where Markov chains have been used, e.g., to simulate the mammalian neocortex.
- Systems biology, for instance with the modeling of viral infection of single cells.
- Compartmental models for disease outbreak and epidemic modeling.

### Information theory

Markov chains are used throughout information processing. Claude Shannon's famous 1948 paper *A Mathematical Theory of Communication*, which in a single step created the field of information theory, opens by introducing the concept of entropy by modeling texts in a natural language (such as English) as generated by an ergodic Markov process, where each letter may depend statistically on previous letters. Such idealized models can capture many of the statistical regularities of systems. Even without describing the full structure of the system perfectly, such signal models can make possible very effective data compression through entropy encoding techniques such as arithmetic coding. They also allow effective state estimation and pattern recognition. Markov chains also play an important role in reinforcement learning.

Markov chains are also the basis for hidden Markov models, which are an important tool in such diverse fields as telephone networks (which use the Viterbi algorithm for error correction), speech recognition and bioinformatics (such as in rearrangements detection).

The LZMA lossless data compression algorithm combines Markov chains with Lempel-Ziv compression to achieve very high compression ratios.

### Queueing theory

Markov chains are the basis for the analytical treatment of queues (queueing theory). Agner Krarup Erlang initiated the subject in 1917. This makes them critical for optimizing the performance of telecommunications networks, where messages must often compete for limited resources (such as bandwidth).

Numerous queueing models use continuous-time Markov chains. For example, an M/M/1 queue is a CTMC on the non-negative integers where upward transitions from *i* to *i* + 1 occur at rate *λ* according to a Poisson process and describe job arrivals, while transitions from *i* to *i* – 1 (for *i* > 1) occur at rate *μ* (job service times are exponentially distributed) and describe completed services (departures) from the queue.

### Internet applications

The PageRank of a webpage as used by Google is defined by a Markov chain. It is the probability to be at page i in the stationary distribution on the following Markov chain on all (known) webpages. If N is the number of known webpages, and a page i has $k_{i}$ outgoing links from it then it has transition probability ${\frac {\alpha }{k_{i}}}+{\frac {1-\alpha }{N}}$ for all pages that are linked to and ${\frac {1-\alpha }{N}}$ for all pages that are not linked to. The parameter $\alpha$ is taken to be about 0.85.

Markov models have also been used to analyze web navigation behavior of users. A user's web link transition on a particular website can be modeled using first- or second-order Markov models and can be used to make predictions regarding future navigation and to personalize the web page for an individual user.

### Statistics

Markov chain methods have also become very important for generating sequences of random numbers to accurately reflect very complicated desired probability distributions, via a process called Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). In recent years this has revolutionized the practicability of Bayesian inference methods, allowing a wide range of posterior distributions to be simulated and their parameters found numerically.

### Economics and finance

Markov chains are used in finance and economics to model a variety of different phenomena, including the distribution of income, the size distribution of firms, asset prices and market crashes. D. G. Champernowne built a Markov chain model of the distribution of income in 1953. Herbert A. Simon and co-author Charles Bonini used a Markov chain model to derive a stationary Yule distribution of firm sizes. Louis Bachelier was the first to observe that stock prices followed a random walk. The random walk was later seen as evidence in favor of the efficient-market hypothesis and random walk models were popular in the literature of the 1960s. Regime-switching models of business cycles were popularized by James D. Hamilton (1989), who used a Markov chain to model switches between periods of high and low GDP growth (or, alternatively, economic expansions and recessions). A more recent example is the Markov switching multifractal model of Laurent E. Calvet and Adlai J. Fisher, which builds upon the convenience of earlier regime-switching models. It uses an arbitrarily large Markov chain to drive the level of volatility of asset returns.

Dynamic macroeconomics makes heavy use of Markov chains. An example is using Markov chains to exogenously model prices of equity (stock) in a general equilibrium setting.

Credit rating agencies produce annual tables of the transition probabilities for bonds of different credit ratings.

Markov chains are generally used in describing path-dependent arguments, where current structural configurations condition future outcomes. An example is the reformulation of the idea, originally due to Karl Marx's *Das Kapital*, tying economic development to the rise of capitalism. In current research, it is common to use a Markov chain to model how once a country reaches a specific level of economic development, the configuration of structural factors, such as size of the middle class, the ratio of urban to rural residence, the rate of political mobilization, etc., will generate a higher probability of transitioning from authoritarian to democratic regime.

### Music

Markov chains are employed in algorithmic music composition, particularly in software such as Csound, Max, and SuperCollider. In a first-order chain, the states of the system become note or pitch values, and a probability vector for each note is constructed, completing a transition probability matrix (see below). An algorithm is constructed to produce output note values based on the transition matrix weightings, which could be MIDI note values, frequency (Hz), or any other desirable metric.

| Note | A | C♯ | E♭ |
|---|---|---|---|
| A | 0.1 | 0.6 | 0.3 |
| C♯ | 0.25 | 0.05 | 0.7 |
| E♭ | 0.7 | 0.3 | 0 |

| Notes | A | D | G |
|---|---|---|---|
| AA | 0.18 | 0.6 | 0.22 |
| AD | 0.5 | 0.5 | 0 |
| AG | 0.15 | 0.75 | 0.1 |
| DD | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| DA | 0.25 | 0 | 0.75 |
| DG | 0.9 | 0.1 | 0 |
| GG | 0.4 | 0.4 | 0.2 |
| GA | 0.5 | 0.25 | 0.25 |
| GD | 1 | 0 | 0 |

A second-order Markov chain can be introduced by considering the current state *and* also the previous state, as indicated in the second table. Higher, *n*th-order chains tend to "group" particular notes together, while 'breaking off' into other patterns and sequences occasionally. These higher-order chains tend to generate results with a sense of phrasal structure, rather than the 'aimless wandering' produced by a first-order system.

Markov chains can be used structurally, as in Xenakis's Analogique A and B. Markov chains are also used in systems which use a Markov model to react interactively to music input.

Usually musical systems need to enforce specific control constraints on the finite-length sequences they generate, but control constraints are not compatible with Markov models, since they induce long-range dependencies that violate the Markov hypothesis of limited memory. In order to overcome this limitation, a new approach has been proposed.

### Games and sports

Markov chains can be used to model many games of chance. The children's games Snakes and Ladders and "Hi Ho! Cherry-O", for example, are represented exactly by Markov chains. At each turn, the player starts in a given state (on a given square) and from there has fixed odds of moving to certain other states (squares).

Markov chain models have been used in advanced baseball analysis since 1960, although their use is still rare. Each half-inning of a baseball game fits the Markov chain state when the number of runners and outs are considered. During any at-bat, there are 24 possible combinations of number of outs and position of the runners. Mark Pankin shows that Markov chain models can be used to evaluate runs created for both individual players as well as a team. He also discusses various kinds of strategies and play conditions: how Markov chain models have been used to analyze statistics for game situations such as bunting and base stealing and differences when playing on grass vs. AstroTurf.

### Markov text generators

Markov processes can also be used to generate superficially real-looking text given a sample document. Markov processes are used in a variety of recreational "parody generator" software (see dissociated press, Jeff Harrison, Mark V. Shaney, and Academias Neutronium). Several open-source text generation libraries using Markov chains exist.
