---
title: "Cardinality (part 2/2)"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinality
domain: metrics-cardinality
license: CC-BY-SA-4.0
tags: metric cardinality, label dimensions explosion, time series count, tag value blowup
fetched: 2026-07-02
part: 2/2
---

## Alternative and additional axioms

Around the turn of the 20th century, set theory turned to an axiomatic approach to avoid rampant foundational issues related to its naive study (cf. *§ Axiomatic set theory*). The most common axiomatic set theory used today is Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC). In this system, the relevant axioms include: the Axiom of Infinity, stating roughly "there is an infinite set", specifically, a set with cardinality of the natural numbers ⁠ $\mathbb {N}$ ⁠; the Axiom of power set, which says that, for any set ⁠ A ⁠, the powerset ⁠ ${\mathcal {P}}(A)$ ⁠ also exists; and the Axiom of Choice, explained below. ZFC has been criticized both for being too strong, and too weak. Similarly, there are many "natural extensions" of ZFC studied by set theorists. Thus, there exist many alternative systems of axioms each of which has implications to the standard theory of cardinality discussed above.

### Without the axiom of choice

The Axiom of Choice (AC) is a fundamental principle in the foundations of mathematics which has seen much controversy in its history. Informally, it states that given any collection of non-empty sets, it is possible to construct a new set by choosing one element from each set, even if the collection is infinite. The controversy over AC had mostly to do with the nature of how it chose these elements. Whereas most axioms seem to describe what sets are or allow one to construct explicit sets, AC does not tell you *which* set you have constructed, just that such a choice function exists, leaving the constructed set implicit. It is hardly controversial to modern mathematicians. However, because of its unique historical controversy it is often given special treatment not given to other axioms that basic proofs which use it ought to call it out.

The Axiom of Choice is very closely related to the nature of cardinality. AC imposes a strict structure on what cardinality can be and what it means to compare to sets. Assuming AC is false, cardinality has a much more intricate structure and resists the kind of linear order AC offers. For example, cardinal inequality does not treat injection and surjection equivalently. Specifically, there exists sets, such that there is a surjection from ⁠ A ⁠ onto ⁠ B ⁠, but no injection from ⁠ B ⁠ into ⁠ A ⁠. Thus injection is a strictly stronger notion, since, given an injection, it is always possible to find a surjection in the opposite direction. Similarly, although cardinal inequality maintains a partial order, there exist incomparable sets under cardinal inequality, that is, the law of trichotomy fails to hold, and there are sets such that none of ⁠ $A<B$ ⁠, ⁠ $A\sim B$ ⁠, ⁠ $A>B$ ⁠ hold. Both of these (trichotomy and that surjection implies injection) are equivalent to AC.

Because trichotomy does not hold and the aleph sequence has a natural well-order, there exist sets whose cardinality does not correspond to any aleph. As such, the cardinality function ⁠ $A\mapsto \vert A\vert$ ⁠ becomes somewhat more difficult to define. In fact, a cardinality function that maps each set to a unique "representative" of that cardinality—i.e. satisfying Hume's principle, and idempotence (⁠ $\vert \vert S\vert \vert =\vert S\vert$ ⁠ or ⁠ $\vert S\vert \sim S$ ⁠)—is impossible without AC. Set theories without AC address this by adopting the so-called *Frege–Russell–Scott* definition, introduced by Dana Scott, reminiscent of the *Frege–Russell* cardinal numbers. Under this definition, one considers the "Set of all sets" equinumerous with ⁠ A ⁠, but applies Scott's trick to regularize these classes. Specifically, it reduces this class to only those sets of minimal rank; that is, those sets which appear earliest in the von Neumann hierarchy. Since the von Neumann hierarchy is well-ordered, there is a least rank, and since these sets all share that rank, their collection is bounded in the hierarchy and thus constitutes a set rather than a proper class.

Cardinal arithmetic is much more involved, losing many of its simplest identities. The identity ⁠ $\vert A\vert +\vert B\vert =\operatorname {max} (\vert A\vert ,\vert B\vert )$ ⁠ requires a well-defined notion of "max" which requires all sets to be comparable, and therefore does not hold. Similarly, the statement that ⁠ ${\mathfrak {p}}^{2}={\mathfrak {p}}$ ⁠ for every infinite cardinal ⁠ ${\mathfrak {p}}$ ⁠, and even the statement that the arbitrary product of non-zero cardinal numbers always non-zero—called the *Multiplicative axiom* by Bertrand Russell—are both equivalent to AC. Further, although the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH, that ⁠ $\aleph _{\alpha }=\beth _{\alpha }$ ⁠ for every ⁠ $\alpha$ ⁠) is independent of ZFC, it can be shown ZF+GCH is sufficient to derive AC, and therefore, if AC is false, it follows that GCH does not hold.

### Proper classes

Some set theories include classes, which are collections of sets, which allows theories to discuss any collection of sets without running into issues self-reference (e.g. the set of all sets that do not contain themselves.). A class is called a proper class when, at least intuitively, it is "too large" to form a set. For example, the universe of all sets, the class of all cardinal numbers, and the class of all ordinal numbers are proper classes. Such set theories include Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG), and Morse–Kelley set theory (MK). Cantor originally called the size of these "too large" sets "absolute infinite", separating it from the transfinite. The former he characterized by its "inconsistency", causing paradoxes, and associated the concept with God.

Proper classes can, in a sense, be assigned cardinalities. The first to formally distinguish between sets and classes was John von Neumann, who formalized the notion of "too large to form sets". More accurately, he defined a class to be "too big" (a proper class) if and only if it was equinumerous with the whole universe of sets (cf. *Axiom of limitation of size*; used as an axiom in MK set theory, and derivable as a theorem in NBG). Thus, all proper classes have the same "size". The axiom has several implications, mostly relating to the limitation of size principles of early set theory. It implies the axiom of specification, the axiom of replacement, the axiom of union, and the axiom of global choice.

### Large cardinals

Large cardinal axioms assert the existence of cardinal numbers which, as the name suggests, are very large—so large that they cannot be proven to exist within ZFC. For example, an inaccessible cardinal is, roughly, a cardinal that cannot be approached from below using basic set-theoretic operations such as unions, limits, and powersets (more formally, a regular, limit cardinal greater than ⁠ $\aleph _{0}$ ⁠). Large cardinals are understood in terms of the Von Neumann hierarchy, denoted ⁠ $V_{\alpha }$ ⁠ (for some ordinal ⁠ $\alpha$ ⁠), which can be understood as the sets that can be obtained from the empty set, followed by recursively applying the powerset ⁠ $\alpha$ ⁠ times. Specifically, ⁠ $V_{0}=\varnothing$ ⁠, ⁠ $V_{\alpha +1}={\mathcal {P}}(V_{\alpha })$ ⁠ and ⁠ $V_{\lambda }=\bigcup _{\alpha <\lambda }V_{\alpha }$ ⁠ for a limit ordinal ⁠ $\lambda$ ⁠.

There exist many known properties defining large cardinals, which come seemingly in a linear hierarchy, in terms of consistency strength. As an analogy, in ZFC without the Axiom of Infinity can only prove the existence of finite sets. Therefore ⁠ $V_{\omega }(={\mathcal {P}}(\varnothing )\cup {\mathcal {P}}({\mathcal {P}}(\varnothing ))\cup \cdots )$ ⁠, whose existence is provable in usual ZFC, can serve as a model of ZFC–Infinity, and thus if ZFC is consistent, ZFC–Infinity is consistent. Analogously, ZFC+"There exists an inaccessible cardinal" implies the consistency of ZFC, since if ⁠ $\kappa$ ⁠ is inaccessible, ⁠ $V_{\kappa }$ ⁠ can serve as a model of ZFC (cf. *Grothendieck universe*). Stronger and stronger large cardinal axioms assert the existence of larger and larger cardinals, each of which proves the consistency of the weaker systems.

Large cardinals are at the forefront of set-theoretic research for both practical and philosophical reasons. In a practical sense, it is often the case that unproven or unprovable conjectures can be settled by sufficiently strong large cardinal axioms. For example, the existence of a measurable cardinal is inconsistent with Gödel's constructibility axiom. Similarly, the existence of a Reinhardt cardinal is inconsistent with the axiom of choice, which makes it a much more controversial large cardinal axiom. In a philosophical sense, according to a platonic view among set-theorists such as W. Hugh Woodin, these axioms simply extend the system to include sets that are "supposed" to be considered. That is, there is some fundamental universe of sets, which these axioms grant further access to. For this reason, large cardinal axioms are generally given preference compared to other possible axioms of set theory. This view is controversial among a competing philosophy, sometimes called pluralism, which posits that set theory should be understood as a multiverse of set theories, but no "absolute" or "true" model.

### Determinacy

The Axiom of Determinacy (AD) asserts that certain kinds of mathematical games on the natural numbers are determined; that is, one player will always have a guaranteed winning strategy. The first serious study of the consequences of AD started during the 1960s in descriptive set theory—which, roughly, studies the definable sets of the real numbers—after it was noticed that it leads to very nice regulatory properties of the real numbers. However, it was shown that this axiom is inconsistent with AC and thus was never taken as a fundamental axiom of set theory.

AD is closely related to the cardinality of the real numbers, giving it a structure different from that under AC. Under AD, the real numbers cannot be well-ordered, meaning ⁠ $\mathbb {R}$ ⁠ does not correspond to any aleph. Despite this, AD imposes a rigid structure on the real numbers, known as the perfect set property, implying that every set of real numbers is either countable, or has cardinality of exactly ⁠ $2^{\aleph _{0}}$ ⁠, equal to the whole real line. Similarly, it also implies that all sets of real numbers are Lebesgue measurable, eliminating the existence of sets whose size is non-zero, but cannot be assigned a length. Existence of such non-measurable sets allows the Banach–Tarski paradox, demonstrating that one can cut one sphere into finitely many pieces, smoothly rearrange them, and end with two solid spheres, which becomes impossible under AD.

On the other hand, due to the restrictions on what sets can exist, it implies that one can partition the real numbers into *strictly* more groups than there are real numbers. Specifically, one can find an injection to show that ⁠ $\vert \mathbb {R} \vert \leq \vert \mathbb {R} /\mathbb {Q} \vert$ ⁠ (equivalence classes of reals, such that ⁠ $x\sim y$ ⁠ iff ⁠ $x-y\in \mathbb {Q}$ ⁠). However, if an injection ⁠ $F:\mathbb {R} /\mathbb {Q} \to \mathbb {R}$ ⁠ existed, then there is a linear order on ⁠ $\mathbb {R} /\mathbb {Q}$ ⁠ (given by ⁠ $a\leq b$ ⁠ if ⁠ $F(a)\leq F(b)$ ⁠). This allows one to construct a set which cannot be assigned a measure, contradicting AD. Therefore no such injection could exist, and thus ⁠ $\vert \mathbb {R} \vert <\vert \mathbb {R} /\mathbb {Q} \vert$ ⁠.

However, its relationship with large cardinals and the continuum hypothesis is still of heavy interest among set theorists such as Donald A. Martin, John R. Steel, and W. Hugh Woodin, at least in part because AD is equiconsistent with the large cardinal axiom that there exists infinitely many Woodin cardinals.


## Skolem's paradox

In model theory, a model corresponds to a specific interpretation of a formal language or theory. It consists of a domain (a set of objects) and an interpretation of the symbols in the language, such that the axioms of the theory are satisfied within this structure. In first-order logic, the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem states that if a countable theory has an infinite model, then it also has models of every other infinite cardinality. Applied to set theory, it asserts that Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, which proves the existence of uncountable sets such as ⁠ ${\mathcal {P}}(\mathbb {N} )$ ⁠, nevertheless has a countable model. Thus, Skolem's paradox was posed as follows: how can it be that there exists a domain of set theory which only contains countably many objects, but is capable of satisfying the statement "there exists a set with uncountably many elements"?

Skolem's paradox does not only apply to ZFC, but *any* first-order set theory, if it is countable and consistent, has a model which is countable. A mathematical explanation of the paradox, showing that it is not a true contradiction in mathematics, was first given in 1922 by Thoralf Skolem, who asserted it as a reason against founding mathematics on first order logic. He explained that the countability or uncountability of a set is not absolute, but relative to the model in which the cardinality is measured. This is because, for example, if the set ⁠ X ⁠ is countable in a model of set theory then there is a bijection ⁠ $f:\mathbb {N} \mapsto X$ ⁠. But a submodel containing ⁠ X ⁠ which excludes all such functions would thus contain no bijection between ⁠ X ⁠ and ⁠ $\mathbb {N}$ ⁠, and therefore ⁠ X ⁠ would be uncountable. In second-order and higher-order logics, the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem does not hold. This is due to the fact that second-order logic quantifies over all subsets of the domain. Skolem's work was harshly received by Ernst Zermelo, who argued against the limitations of first-order logic and Skolem's notion of "relativity", but the result quickly came to be accepted by the mathematical community.


## History

### Ancient history

From the 6th century BCE, the writings of Greek philosophers, such as Anaximander, discussed infinite sets or objects, however, those objects were generally viewed as paradoxical and imperfect (cf. *Zeno's paradoxes*). Aristotle distinguished between the notions of actual and potential infinity, arguing that Greek mathematicians understood the difference, and that they "do not need the [actual] infinite and do not use it." The Greek notion of number (*αριθμός*, *arithmos*) was used exclusively for a definite number of definite objects (i.e. finite numbers). This was codified in Euclid's *Elements*, where the fifth common notion stated "The whole is greater than the part", called the *Euclidean principle*. This principle was the dominating philosophy in mathematics until the 19th century.

Around the 4th century BCE, Jaina mathematics were the first to discuss different sizes of infinity. They defined three major classes of number: enumerable (finite numbers), unenumerable (*asamkhyata*, roughly, countably infinite), and infinite (*ananta*, roughly, the continuum). Then they had five classes of infinite numbers: infinite in one direction, infinite in both directions, infinite in area, infinite everywhere, and infinite perpetually.

One of the earliest explicit uses of a one-to-one correspondence is recorded in Aristotle's *Mechanics* (c. 350 BCE), known as Aristotle's wheel paradox. The paradox can be briefly described as follows: A wheel is depicted as two concentric circles. The larger, outer circle is tangent to a horizontal line (e.g. a road that it rolls on), while the smaller, inner circle is rigidly affixed to the larger. Assuming the larger circle rolls along the line without slipping (or skidding) for one full revolution, the distances moved by both circles are the same: the circumference of the larger circle. Further, the lines traced by the bottom-most point of each is the same length. Since the smaller wheel does not skip any points, and no point on the smaller wheel is used more than once, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the two circles.

### Pre-Cantorian set theory

Portrait of

Galileo Galilei

,

c.

1640

(left). Portrait of

Bernard Bolzano

1781–1848 (right).

Galileo Galilei presented what was later coined Galileo's paradox in his book *Two New Sciences* (1638), where he presented a seeming paradox in infinite sequences of numbers. It went as follows: for each perfect square ⁠ $(n^{2})$ ⁠ 1, 4, 9, 16, and so on, there is a unique square root ⁠ $\textstyle ({\sqrt {n^{2}}}=n)$ ⁠ 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. Therefore, there are as many perfect squares as there are square roots. However, every number is a square root, since it can be squared, but not every number is a perfect square. Moreover, the proportion of perfect squares as one passes larger values diminishes, and is eventually smaller than any given fraction. Galileo denied that this was fundamentally contradictory, however he concluded that this meant we could not compare the sizes of infinite sets, missing the opportunity to discover cardinality.

In *A Treatise of Human Nature* (1739), David Hume said "When two numbers are so combined, as that the one has always a unit answering to every unit of the other, we pronounce them equal"*,* now called *Hume's principle*, which was used extensively by Gottlob Frege later during the rise of set theory.

Bernard Bolzano's *Paradoxes of the Infinite* (*Paradoxien des Unendlichen*, 1851) is often considered the first systematic attempt to introduce the concept of sets into mathematical analysis. In this work, Bolzano defended the notion of actual infinity, presented an early formulation of what would later be recognized as one-to-one correspondence between infinite sets. He discussed examples such as the pairing between the intervals ⁠ $[0,5]$ ⁠ and ⁠ $[0,12]$ ⁠ by the relation ⁠ $5y=12x$ ⁠, and revisited Galileo's paradox. However, he too resisted saying that these sets were, in that sense, the same size. While *Paradoxes of the Infinite* anticipated several ideas central to later set theory, the work had little influence on contemporary mathematics, in part due to its posthumous publication and limited circulation.

### Early set theory

#### Georg Cantor

The concept of cardinality emerged nearly fully formed in the work of Georg Cantor during the 1870s and 1880s, in the context of mathematical analysis. In a series of papers beginning with *On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers* (1874), Cantor introduced the idea of comparing the sizes of infinite sets, through the notion of one-to-one correspondence. He showed that the set of real numbers was, in this sense, strictly larger than the set of natural numbers using a nested intervals argument. This result was later refined into the more widely known diagonal argument in 1891, published in *Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre,* where he also proved the more general result (now called Cantor's Theorem) that the power set of any set is strictly larger than the set itself.

Cantor introduced the notion cardinal numbers together with ordinal numbers, which he viewed as abstractions of sets. For a given set ⁠ M ⁠, he wrote ⁠ $\textstyle {\overline {M}}$ ⁠ to mean the abstraction of that set from its elements, while maintaining their order, and cardinal numbers were a double abstraction, written ⁠ $\textstyle M$ ⁠. Specifically, his definition was "the general concept which, with the aid of our intelligence, results from a set when we abstract from the nature of its various elements and from the order of their being given." This definition was considered to be imprecise, unclear, and purely psychological, and it would be some time before the concept was put on more rigorous footing. He also introduced the Aleph sequence for infinite cardinal numbers. These notations appeared in correspondence and were formalized in his later writings, particularly the series *Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten Mengenlehre* (1895–1897). In these works, Cantor developed an arithmetic of cardinal numbers, defining addition, multiplication, and exponentiation of cardinal numbers. This led to the formulation of the Continuum Hypothesis: whether ⁠ $2^{\aleph _{0}}=\aleph _{1}$ ⁠. Cantor was unable to resolve CH and left it as an open problem.

#### Other contributors

Parallel to Cantor’s development, Richard Dedekind independently formulated many advanced theorems of set theory, and helped establish set-theoretic foundations of algebra and arithmetic. Dedekind's *The Nature and Meaning of Numbers* (1888) emphasized structural properties over extensional definitions, and supported the bijective formulation of size and number. Dedekind was in correspondence with Cantor during the development of set theory; he supplied Cantor with a proof of the countability of the algebraic numbers, and gave feedback and modifications on Cantor's proofs before publishing.

After Cantor's 1883 proof that all finite-dimensional spaces ⁠ $(\mathbb {R} ^{n})$ ⁠ have the same cardinality, in 1890, Giuseppe Peano introduced the Peano curve, which was a more visual proof that the unit interval ⁠ $[0,1]$ ⁠ has the same cardinality as the unit square on ⁠ $\mathbb {R} ^{2}$ ⁠. This created a new area of mathematical analysis studying what are now called space-filling curves. In 1894, attempting to formalize Cantor's "cardinal number", Peano introduced "definition by abstraction": if one can define an equivalence relation, then one may define "that property" which an equivalence class describes. However, this was received harshly by Russell for not considering that this property may not be unique.

German logician Gottlob Frege attempted to ground the concepts of number and arithmetic in logic using Cantor's theory of cardinality and Hume's principle in *Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik* (1884) and the subsequent *Grundgesetze der Arithmetik* (1893, 1903). Frege defined cardinal numbers as equivalence classes of sets under equinumerosity. However, Frege's approach to set theory was later shown to be flawed. His approach was eventually reformalized by Bertrand Russell and Alfred Whitehead in *Principia Mathematica* (1910–1913, vol. II) using a theory of types. This definition of cardinal numbers is now referred to as the *Frege–Russell* definition. This definition was eventually superseded by the convention established by John von Neumann in 1928 which uses representatives to define cardinal numbers.

At the Paris conference of the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900, David Hilbert, one of the most influential mathematicians of the time, gave a speech wherein he presented ten unsolved problems (of a total of 23, later published, now called *Hilbert's problems*). Of these, he placed "Cantor's problem" (now called the Continuum Hypothesis) as the first on the list. This list of problems would prove to be very influential in 20th century mathematics, and attracted a lot of attention from other mathematicians toward Cantor's theory of cardinality.

### Axiomatic set theory

Felix Hausdorff

and

Kurt Gödel

In 1908, Ernst Zermelo proposed the first axiomatization of set theory, now called Zermelo set theory, primarily to support his earlier (1904) proof of the Well-ordering theorem, which showed that all cardinal numbers could be represented as Alephs, though the proof required a controversial principle now known as the Axiom of Choice (AC). Zermelo's system was extended by Abraham Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem in the 1920s to create the standard foundation of set theory, called Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC, "C" for the Axiom of Choice). ZFC provided a rigorous foundation through which infinite cardinals could be systematically studied while avoiding the paradoxes of naive set theory.

Ignoring possible foundational issues, during the early 1900s, Felix Hausdorff began studying "exorbitant numbers": roughly, very large cardinal numbers, or what are now called inaccessible cardinals. This work was continued and popularized by several other influential set theorists such as Paul Mahlo—who introduced Mahlo cardinals—as well as Wacław Sierpiński, and Alfred Tarski. Their work would eventually be known collectively as the study of large cardinals. Inaccessible cardinals were used as Grothendieck universes in category theory as an optional organizational tool to treat certain large categories as sets instead of proper classes.

In 1940, Kurt Gödel showed that the Continuum Hypothesis (CH) cannot be *disproved* from the axioms of ZFC by showing that both CH and AC hold in his constructible universe: an inner model of ZFC. The existence of a model of ZFC in which additional axioms hold shows that the additional axioms are (relatively) consistent with ZFC. In 1963, Paul Cohen showed that CH cannot be *proven* from the ZFC axioms, which showed that CH was independent from ZFC. To prove his result, Cohen developed the method of forcing, which has become a standard tool in set theory. Cohen was awarded the Fields Medal in 1966 for his proof.
